How to cite
Complete issue
More information about this article
Journal's webpage in redalyc.org
Scientific Information System Redalyc
Network of Scientific Journals from Latin America and the Caribbean, Spain and
Portugal
Project academic non-profit, developed under the open access initiative
Revista Opinião Jurídica
ISSN: 1806-0420
ISSN: 2447-6641
Centro Universitário Christus
Fornasier, Mateus de Oliveira
LEGAL EDUCATION IN THE 21ST CENTURY AND THE ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
Revista Opinião Jurídica, vol. 19, no. 31, 2021, May-August, pp. 1-32
Centro Universitário Christus
DOI: https://doi.org/10.12662/2447-6641oj.v19i31.p1-32.2021
Available in: https://www.redalyc.org/articulo.oa?id=633875001

Editora responsável: Profa. Dra. Fayga Bedê                                   doi:10.12662/2447-6641oj.v19i31.p1-32.2021 
https://orcid.org/0000-0001-6444-2631 
 
 
Submetido: 10 jun. 2020 
Aprovado: 1 dez. 2020 
LEGAL EDUCATION IN THE 21ST CENTURY AND THE 
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE 
 
ENSINO JURÍDICO NO SÉCULO XXI E A INTELIGÊNCIA 
ARTIFICIAL 
 
EDUCACIÓN JURÍDICA EN EL SIGLO XXI E INTELIGENCIA 
ARTIFICIAL 
 
Mateus de Oliveira Fornasier* 
 
1 Introduction.  2 Legal Education and Digital Technologies. 2.1 Skills 
Needed for a Scenario where Technology Becomes Ubiquous (Even in Law). 
2.2 Interdisciplinarity for Lawyers understood as “Transition Engineers”. 3 
Artificial Intelligence in Higher Education. 3.1 Artificial Intelligence in Legal 
Education. 4 Concluding remarks. References. 
 
ABSTRACT 
Objectives: We sought to study the main reflexes of the digital economy that influence 
legal education, and some of the operational suggestions that accompany criticisms of 
that process. To this end, some of the main suggestions made by experts in law and 
education to transform legal education in the face of the technological ubiquity scenario 
were observed. In a second moment, the transformations that higher education has 
been undergoing with the introduction of AI in the market and in universities were 
specifically analyzed. Finally, both the reflexes of AI in legal education and suggestions 
related to transformations that legal education must undergo were studied. 
                                                 
* Doctor of Law, Universidade do Vale do Rio dos Sinos (UNISINOS, Brazil, 2013). Post- Doctorate of 
Law, University of Westminster (United Kingdom, 2018-2019). Professor at the Stricto 
Sensu Postgraduate Program (LLM and PhD) in Law, Northwest Regional University of the State of 
Rio Grande do Sul. E-mail: <mateus.fornasier@gmail.com>. http://orcid.org/0000-0002-1617-4270 
 
 
 
 
                           R. Opin. Jur., Fortaleza, ano 19, n. 31, p.1-32, maio/ago. 2021           •    1 
Esta obra está licenciada sob uma licença Creative Commons Atribuição - Não comercial - Compartilhar igual 4.0 Internacional. 
 

Legal Education in the 21st century and the Artificial Intelligence 
 
2 •   R. Opin. Jur., Fortaleza, ano 19, n. 31, p.1-32, maio/ago. 2021 
 
Methodology: The hypothetical-deductive procedure method was used, with a 
qualitative and technical approach of bibliographic-documentary research, in this 
exploratory and interdisciplinary research. 
Results: It was identified that legal education will have to move away from a 
retrospective epistemological stance, and evolve towards a prospective and projective 
stance, incorporating knowledge from 
technological areas 
and quantitative 
methodologies, without neglecting the exercise of traditional normative skills, 
communicative and narrative values that are highly evaluated by law professionals, thus 
emphasizing the need to foster student creativity. It is also concluded that higher 
education courses should incorporate coding in their curricula, in parallel with 
encouraging students' creativity and their communicative skills — however, a regulation 
should be developed in parallel, which must take into account the ethical risks of the 
use of AI in teaching. Finally, it is clear that the legal professions are not yet under a very 
pressing possibility of substitution by AI, but universities must make students aware that 
there are specific tasks in the legal professions that may be replaced by AI tools in order 
to advise them to focus on tasks that cannot be replaced by machines. 
Keywords: Legal education. Digitization. Artificial intelligence. 
RESUMO 
Objetivo: Buscou-se estudar os principais reflexos da economia digital que influenciam a 
educação jurídica, e algumas das sugestões operacionais que acompanham as críticas a 
esse processo. Para isso, foram observadas algumas das principais sugestões realizadas 
por experts do Direito e da educação para se transformar a educação jurídica diante do 
cenário de ubiquidade tecnológica, primeiramente. Num segundo momento, foram 
analisadas, especificamente, as transformações que a educação superior vem sofrendo 
com a introdução da IA no mercado e nas universidades. Por fim, foram estudados 
tanto os reflexos da IA na educação jurídica quanto sugestões relacionadas a 
transformações pelas quais o ensino jurídico deve passar.  
Metodologia: Utilizou-se o método de procedimento hipotético-dedutivo, com 
abordagem qualitativa e técnica de pesquisa bibliográfico-documental, nessa pesquisa de 
natureza exploratória e interdisciplinar. 
Resultados: Identificou-se que o ensino jurídico terá de se afastar de uma postura 
epistemológica retrospectiva, e evoluir em direção a uma postura prospectiva e projetiva, 
incorporando conhecimentos de áreas tecnológicas e metodologias quantitativas, sem 
deixar de lado o exercício das tradicionais habilidades normativas, comunicativas e 

Mateus de Oliveira Fornasier 
R. Opin. Jur., Fortaleza, ano 19, n. 31, p.1-32, maio/ago. 2021 •    3 
 
narrativas valorizadas nos profissionais do Direito, enfatizando-se, assim, a necessidade 
de fomento à criatividade do estudante. Também se conclui que os cursos superiores 
devem incorporar programação em seus currículos, em paralelo ao incentivo à 
criatividade dos estudantes e de suas capacidades comunicativas — porém, deve-se 
desenvolver, em paralelo, uma regulação do uso da IA que leve em consideração os 
riscos éticos de seu uso no ensino. Por fim, tem-se que as profissões jurídicas ainda não 
estão sob uma possibilidade muito premente de substituição por IA, mas as 
universidades devem conscientizar os estudantes que há tarefas específicas nas profissões 
jurídicas que podem vir a ser substituídas por ferramentas de IA, a fim de os aconselhem 
a se concentrar em tarefas não substituíveis por máquinas. 
Palavras-chave: Educação jurídica. Digitalização. Inteligência artificial. 
RESUMEN 
Objetivo: Se buscó estudiar los principales reflejos de la economía digital que inciden en 
la educación jurídica, y algunas de las sugerencias operativas que acompañan a las 
críticas a este proceso. Para ello, se observaron algunas de las principales sugerencias 
realizadas por los expertos en derecho y educación para transformar la educación 
jurídica ante el escenario de ubicuidad tecnológica. En un segundo momento, se 
analizaron específicamente las transformaciones que ha venido experimentando la 
educación superior con la introducción de la IA en el mercado y en las universidades. 
Finalmente, se estudiaron tanto los reflejos de la IA en la educación jurídica como las 
sugerencias relacionadas con las transformaciones que debe atravesar la educación 
jurídica. 
Metodología: Se utilizó el método de procedimiento hipotético-deductivo, con un 
enfoque cualitativo y técnico de investigación bibliográfico-documental, en una 
investigación de naturaleza exploratoria e interdisciplinaria. 
Resultados: Se identificó que la educación jurídica deberá alejarse de una postura 
epistemológica retrospectiva, y evolucionar hacia una postura prospectiva y proyectiva, 
incorporando conocimientos de áreas tecnológicas y metodologías cuantitativas, sin 
descuidar el ejercicio de las competencias normativas tradicionales y de los valores 
comunicativos y narrativos valorados por los profesionales del derecho, enfatizando así 
la necesidad de fomentar la creatividad de los estudiantes. También se concluye que los 
cursos de educación superior deben incorporar la programación en sus planes de 
estudio, en paralelo con el fomento de la creatividad de los estudiantes y sus habilidades 
comunicativas; sin embargo, se debe desarrollar una regulación en paralelo que tenga en 
cuenta los riesgos éticos de la aplicación de IA en la enseñanza. Finalmente, está claro 

Legal Education in the 21st century and the Artificial Intelligence 
 
4 •   R. Opin. Jur., Fortaleza, ano 19, n. 31, p.1-32, maio/ago. 2021 
 
que las profesiones jurídicas aún no se encuentran bajo una posibilidad muy apremiante 
de sustitución por IA, pero las universidades deben concienciar a los estudiantes de que 
existen tareas específicas en las profesiones jurídicas que pueden ser sustituidas por 
herramientas de IA para poder aconsejarles que se concentren en tareas que la máquina 
no pueda reemplazar. 
Palabras clave: Educación jurídica. Digitalización. Inteligencia artificial. 
 
1 INTRODUCTION 
 
The current context of legal education in Brazil shows a worrying picture, due to 
an extremely relevant factual contradiction. On the one hand, we have a scenario of 
increasing progression in the number of courses each year: between 1977 and 1995, 108 
new Law courses were opened in Brazil, which means an average of six new courses per 
year; between 1995 and 2011, 55 new courses were created per year, totaling 1,121 Law 
courses at the end of this period; between 2011 and 2012, that number increased to 
1,158, which means 38 new Law courses created in a single year — and this expansion is 
much more pronounced in the private network than in the public one (FUNDAÇÃO 
GETÚLIO VARGAS, 2016, p. 27-47). On the other hand, not only the most recently 
reported economic crises, but also technological advances, have shown a trend of 
reduction of the size of the State's civil service in Brazil, an ever greater automation in 
the health sector services in general, and an increase in the presence of distance and 
telepresential courses. 
 
NMC Horizon Report (BECKER et al., 2017) already predicted that the horizon 
for the use of AI systems in higher education would start approximately in 2022. 
According to the same report, currently AI has been regularly leveraged in higher 
education in the form of 24/7 online help desk — for example, the use of IBM Watson 
at Deakin University. There are possibilities for using more sophisticated virtual tutors 
and adaptive learning tools — which are often accompanied by concerns in the sense 
that technology cannot (and should not) replace human educators. In addition, 
machine learning already encourages progress in professional life and informal learning 
— as it is happening in the Smart Flower Recognition System project, a partnership 
between Microsoft Research Asia and the Chinese Academy of Sciences, to help 
botanists in China quickly identify plants with photos taken by smartphones. Through 
neural networks, the algorithms filter submissions of low quality images and identify the 
flowers in the photo database with more than 90% accuracy. To scale up AI possibilities 
over the next four to five years, higher education can start with open source 

Mateus de Oliveira Fornasier 
R. Opin. Jur., Fortaleza, ano 19, n. 31, p.1-32, maio/ago. 2021 •    5 
 
programming and open software libraries for numerical computing, as provided by 
OpenAI and Google's TensorFlow. 
 
But even with this very compromising scenario, there are perspectives from which 
the use of AI in education is considered quite promisingly. Hookway (2014), in 
Interfaces, for example, foresees a more balanced future for higher education, as he does 
not see AI as a tool, but as a third hemisphere of the brain that improves creative and 
cognitive learning processes — an equal and symbiotic partnership, or hybrid mind, 
between humans and their devices. 
 
The change of scenery that society has undergone through the last decades 
emphasizes the relevance of researching legal education in the 21st century, as we have 
shifted from a society configured by face-to-face interactions predominantly, with 
information recorded exclusively on physical substrates, with difficult accesses to 
information and very significant distances for communication, to a virtual society, with 
virtually short distances and greatly facilitated access to information. That description is 
obviously still quite incomplete, if we analyze all technological innovations in the most 
important important sectors of everyday life (economics, politics, industry, etc.), but it 
already serves as an illustration of innovative processes that take place in geometric 
progression, at very large steps, towards even greater social transformations. New 
production processes (3D printing and robotics), new ways of providing services 
(through automated assistants and artificial intelligence), increasingly new forms of 
communication (increasingly fast and reliable connections, internet of things), and even 
new ways to guarantee reliability in the most varied processes (new forms of 
cryptography, such as blockchain technology) enhance this situation, so Law as a whole 
— and legal education particularly — is already having its configuration affected. 
Traditional face-to-face teaching, in which teachers and students played roles in a 
hierarchical, vertical and dogmatic relationship (as it is based on previous knowledge 
applied to current and future problems) has been criticized not only by market experts, 
but also by Law academics themselves, and such criticisms, usually accompanied by well-
founded suggestions, cannot be left out in the process of reconfiguring the knowledge 
and teaching of Law. 
 
The problem that guided this research can be described in the following 
question: what skills, knowledge and competencies does legal education have to offer to 
students in a scenario increasingly marked by digitalization, automation and revolution 
in ways of producing knowledge? As a hypothesis, it is presented that, in addition to a 
greater interdisciplinary knowledge of Law (encompassing its interfaces with 
technological and economic disciplines), the future Law professional will have to learn 
to exercise human capabilities, linked not only to previously developed sets of 

Legal Education in the 21st century and the Artificial Intelligence 
 
6 •   R. Opin. Jur., Fortaleza, ano 19, n. 31, p.1-32, maio/ago. 2021 
 
knowledge, but also, to communication, collaboration and creativity, in order to be able 
to use legal knowledge for the transformation of society and the market. 
 
This article aims, in general, to study the main reflexes of the digital economy 
that have been influencing legal education, as well as some of the operational 
suggestions that accompany the criticisms of such process. To achieve that objective, this 
work was divided into three specific objectives, each one corresponding to a section of 
the development of this text. The first one seeks to observe some of the main 
suggestions made by Law and legal education experts from the most varied contexts 
(USA, Australia, Russia, among others) to transform legal education, especially with 
regard to the models to be followed for classes, curricula and skills/competences to be 
taught. The second section aims to analyze, in particular, the transformations through 
which higher education in general has been undergoing — and, in a prospective 
scenario, has the trend to suffer —  with the introduction of AI in the market and in 
educational institutions. Finally, the third part focuses on the reflexes of the 
introduction of AI in Law and legal education in particular, as well as on the analysis of 
suggestions made in relation to transformations that legal education must undergo due 
to such an advent. 
 
Methodologically, this research has an exploratory and interdisciplinar nature 
(combining Law, Education, Sociology and Technology knowledge), a hypothetical-
deductive procedure method, a qualitative approach (although it uses quantitative 
arguments sometimes) and a bibliographic-documentary research technique. 
 
2 LEGAL EDUCATION AND DIGITAL TECHNOLOGIES 
 
The current passion for technology (technophilia) in education has a profound 
impact on the classroom, changing the relationship between teacher and student and 
among colleagues, as such relationships have been increasingly based on the subject-
machine binomial, despite of the direct intersubjectivity, decreasing thus the ability to 
form bonds, the level of connection between teacher and students, and among students 
as well (GUILHERME, 2019, p. 47). In parallel, new learning processes are being 
developed, with teachers becoming facilitators of the process, and no longer the holders 
of specialized knowledge to be taught. 
Legal education has tended to be “retrospective” hitherto, based on the 
transmission of established knowledge — analysis of existing acts, regulations and cases, 
etc. —, which gives the impression that the examination and understanding of historical 
developments enables the resolution of future problems through the application of 
previous doctrines and legal decisions. The educator-student relationship was, therefore, 
necessarily hierarchical. But past experience, held by a teacher with knowledge and 

Mateus de Oliveira Fornasier 
R. Opin. Jur., Fortaleza, ano 19, n. 31, p.1-32, maio/ago. 2021 •    7 
 
authority, may not be relevant in a changing reality, when all information is easily 
available online. Thus, education needs to become much more forward-looking and 
based on skills, not on content (FENWICK; KAAL; VERMEULEN, 2020, p. 107). 
The massive production and availability of digital information has led to wide-
ranging technical and social changes, which present new methodological challenges to 
legal studies (ALTWICKER, 2019, p. 245). Obtaining legally relevant information by 
digital means, such as Court decisions, State rules, contracts, doctrinal and scientific 
texts, research, legal facts and their metadata, such as number of words and inter and 
hypertextual connections, triggers the pluralization of methods, and the traditional 
(“analogical”) hermeneutics of Law will increasingly have to accommodate knowledge 
from data analysis (which is becoming more and more “digital”). Then, hermeneutics 
will become increasingly intertwined to quantitative methods, methodologically based 
on Statistics, Econometrics and Sociology, among others, and the elaboration of new 
theories that better match the ontologies to deontology  will be essential to overcome 
difficulties that emerge for legal theory. 
Digitization of Law, which means the dissemination of legal data and automation 
of legally relevant information collection, makes additional forms of legal knowledge 
available, as it changes the ways of representing that knowledge. Data-powered 
discoveries about Law, obtained through quantitative approaches, are no longer 
incorporated only in “legal statements”, but, on the contrary, they are extended to 
graphical representations and quantitative models, resulting from quantitative analyzes 
about Law which can be represented in histograms, tree diagrams, scatter plots and word 
clouds, for example (ALTWICKER, 2019, p. 225). 
Legal data processing also implies changes in the traditional functions of legal 
knowledge — which is basically the systematization and generalization of regulatory 
structures for the purposes of knowledge production and as a reservoir of regulatory 
options, as well as the preparation and criticism of decisions and laws, ensuring legal 
teaching and learning (ALTWICKER, 2019, p. 226). Legal data analysis adds at least 
two functions to legal knowledge: it allows a certain predictability of a specific result for 
legal decisions, which could increase legal transparency and consistency in Courts’ 
decisions, in addition to preventing human rights violations by States, for example; and 
demonstrates the efficiency of regulations or legal regimes, which could be interesting, 
for example, to better understand the conditions of general conformity with norms. 
Legal knowledge acquired this way can then be used to improve decision-making and 
law-making. 
A synergy between traditional legal rationality, which makes legal rationality 
visible and applied, and data-driven approaches, must be achieved, and this could 
increase the reliability of Law, but without forgetting the need for critical ordering of 

Legal Education in the 21st century and the Artificial Intelligence 
 
8 •   R. Opin. Jur., Fortaleza, ano 19, n. 31, p.1-32, maio/ago. 2021 
 
that process. Empirical quantitative legal studies, in this sense, could become one more 
basis on which doctrinal arguments can be formed or criticized, alongside historical or 
ethical arguments, for example. 
Legal education must undergo a process of transition from traditional knowledge 
acquisition to a systemically different one, built on the basis of information 
technologies. Measures taken for the computerization of education must aim at training 
students, in manners that enable them to work effectively in new economic conditions. 
For a future lawyer, it is important to obtain not only a certain amount of theoretical 
knowledge, but also practical skills, and digital processes contribute to that. But specific 
electronic formats require development. The proven methods of portfolio, distance 
learning, intermediate and final tests of various types, must be preserved, but they need 
several innovations: digital models of various forensic situations, and digital descriptions 
of legal cases, digital databases — such as material analysis of fingerprints, legal acts and 
procedural documents, etc.), digital video archives of various types of legally relevant 
information (including those of a regulatory and statistical nature), digital experience 
and digital opinions of experts in various legal matters, and those are simply some 
examples of means and tools to be incorporated not only in legal education, but also in 
the repertoire of skills with which professionals will work (YAVORSKIY; MILOVA; 
BOLGOVA, 2020, p. 461). 
Law school graduates must be able to safely qualify a specific legal situation, 
receiving the necessary information from several kinds of sources, which means 
developing a good command of skills related to digital technology. They need to acquire 
knowledge about the creation and circulation of electronic documents such as petitions, 
as well as to interact with individuals and entities through information and 
telecommunications technologies (MIRONOVA; BOGDANOVA; SIMONOVA, 2019, 
p. 5). At the same time, legal and technical protection against information distortion 
must be considered — which leads, for example, to the introduction of big data in 
everyday legal practice, which will significantly reduce the importance of document 
examination. With the use of such technological systems, the use of illegal information 
will become increasingly difficult, and it makes the work of a lawyer simpler, because 
one will have to deal each day less with dishonest opponents, for example. Future 
lawyers need to be educated and trained not only in the classic knowledge and skills, but 
also in the use of the most varied technical means — which will allow the most complete 
dissemination of information on the studied topics, in addition to helping to make 
classes become more practical. 
 
 

Mateus de Oliveira Fornasier 
R. Opin. Jur., Fortaleza, ano 19, n. 31, p.1-32, maio/ago. 2021 •    9 
 
 
2.1SKILLS NEEDED FOR A SCENARIO WHERE TECHNOLOGY BECOMES 
UBIQUOUS (EVEN IN LAW) 
 
It is interesting to carry out comparative studies, verifying what has been debated 
in other countries about changes in legal education, so that such information can be 
compared to Brazilian needs and reality. In Australia, for example, the leadership in the 
quest to understand technological evolution and formulate responses was taken by the 
Law Society of New South Wales and its report on the Future of Law and Innovation in 
the Profession (FLIP), in which that organization recognized seven essential skills/areas 
of knowledge to the success of future Law practice from two main interrelated streams 
of knowledge — the ability of understanding and employing technology — and a list of 
skills that result in a “ready-to-practice” graduate (THE LAW SOCIETY OF NEW 
SOUTH WALES, 2017, p. 78-79): 
 
a) practice skills (interpersonal and professional): interpersonal skills (i.e. 
collaborative work) are currently obtained in clinics and extracurricular 
activities; 
professional 
skills 
(writing, 
interviewing, 
presentation, 
advocacy/negotiation, etc.) are taught in the practice internships. But these 
skills should start to be distributed among the various moments of legal 
education, in order to build and reinforce the initial moments of learning 
without unnecessary repetition; 
 
b) business skills: Business skills are necessary for almost every area of legal 
practice, whether a business or employment with companies, government or 
nonprofits. They are taught, to some extent, in internships and, in Australia, 
they seem to be seen as part of external legal education. At the university 
level, this results from the ubiquity of business training available as part of a 
double degree or before Law studies, if it happens in the students’ interest; 
 
c) project Management: although legal work in the form of dispute resolution or 
drafting contracts are forms of projects that require management, these skills 
do not appear to be subject to any formal  legal education. Thus, it is 
recommended that students should be asked to develop project management 
skills as part of extracurricular activities (i.e. editing legal journals); 
 
d) internationalization and Cross-Border Practice of Law: International Law subject 
has been integrated to the curricula of many Law schools. Further research 
should thus be conducted on the need for courses focused on cross-border 
legal practice (i.e. cross-border transactions and disputes), and on the 
appropriate internship for these courses; 
 
e) interdisciplinary experience (interaction with clients and professionals from other 
areas): the contact of students with other areas of knowledge usually results 

Legal Education in the 21st century and the Artificial Intelligence 
 
10 •   R. Opin. Jur., Fortaleza, ano 19, n. 31, p.1-32, maio/ago. 2021 
 
from other kinds of training, generally external to the course. Exposure to 
clients, on the other hand, occurs through clinics, or volunteer work, 
internships and jobs; 
 
f)
resilience (flexibility and ability to adapt to changes): the frequency and degree of 
change to which the legal professions are exposed suggests that students and 
legal professionals can benefit from education that deals with change 
management and development resilience. 
Regarding the use of technological tools, innovative developments in the elective 
disciplines of Law course (i.e. courses on application development) and extracurricular 
activities, such as competitions, are recommended. In addition, it is necessary to 
consider which aspects of technology need to be included in the main courses — 
blockchain in contracts and properties, electronic discovery in civil proceedings, etc. — 
and whether new subjects, such as programming for lawyers, are necessary. Maybe all 
lawyers need a certain baseline of technological aptitude, but otherwise it will be a 
matter of personal preference related to the acquired technological skills. 
Human legal workers will continue to exist, but they must adapt their skills to the 
constantly changing world (LEGG, 2018). Technological advances can define a lawyer 
and change his/her features, and clients may soon have access to personalized legal 
advice and documentation without the need for a lawyer. Digital technologies do not 
seem to be giving much time for more immediate and efficient forms of conflict 
resolution to emerge. Maybe disputes regarding automobile accidents will be very soon 
resolved with checks on the records and programming of the automated vehicle; 
consumer complaints about delivery services may be quickly solved through GPS 
verification; maybe divorce procedures will take place from the moment that someone's 
smartphone detects, through GPS and text messages, that someone in the couple was 
unfaithful; and maybe last wills and testaments will be executed as soon as a wearable 
device detects the death of its user (KOEBLER, 2017). 
An alternative view of this situation is that only human lawyers can practice Law 
(LEGG, 2018), something that could be concluded from three perspectives: 
 
a) a human lawyer is necessary to protect clients from unqualified and unethical 
devices, thereby promoting competence and integrity in the public interest. 
The lawyer-client relationship is not merely commercial or consumerist, but 
fiduciary — unlike relationships with a taxi driver, a travel agent, or a real 
estate agent, which were shaken by Uber, Expedia and AirBnB; 
 
b) legal practice requires a lawyer to provide the client judgment, discretion, 
creativity, empathy and understanding — characteristics that are very human, 
and perhaps impossible to be entirely acquired soon by algorithms; 

Mateus de Oliveira Fornasier 
R. Opin. Jur., Fortaleza, ano 19, n. 31, p.1-32, maio/ago. 2021 •    11 
 
 
c) lawyers, in their many roles, are essential to maintain civil society, freedom 
and the Rule of Law — values, goals or conditions that humans seek to 
protect. 
However, each one of those reasons may be insufficient to contain the 
evolutionary march of technology. If legal services are not accessible or appreciated for 
the value they offer, consumers will choose legal services provided by technology, even if 
it has inferior quality — although, in fact, in many cases, technology can even be as good 
as or better than that of the human lawyers. The current puzzle faced by legal education 
and practice is captured by aphorisms such as “time will tell” and “time waits for no 
one”, then. Breaks are clearly underway, but the result is unknown. Thus, new legal 
operators (lawyers, mainly) need to be equipped with the necessary skills to fulfill their 
calling in this constantly changing environment. 
Webb (2019, p. 72) inquires about the ways through which Law courses’ 
curricula should be designed when the Law-technology relationship is understood as a 
critical part of a continuous and profound transformation on what it means to be a 
lawyer and a human being. Considering that information technology is no longer a 
collateral novelty, but one of the factors that most influences socialization, jurists can no 
longer resist to it. Thus, focusing on a few simple changes — with only a few new skills 
being introduced in the legal curriculum, for example — would constitute a significant 
error of purpose, since the complex intertwining between human and technology in 
conditions of hyperconnectivity must be taken seriously. Consequently, just as 
information technology cannot be separated from other facets of what it means to be a 
human being, technology must also be at the core of the processes of thinking about 
legal education. Thus, five principles should be observed as a starting point for the 
discussion about the development of totally new curricula (WEBB, 2019, p. 20-24): 
 
a) pervasivity: the real problem that should emerge when one thinks about Law 
and technology is the connection and the difference between both terms. Law 
must be understood as a technological form — for the resolution of conflicts 
and establishment of models of conduct —, and technology, as a form of Law, 
for it establishes rules that must be followed in order to achieve certain goals; 
 
b) interdisciplinarity: the most pressing social problems do not fit into 
conventional academic disciplines, as they are complex, normative, fluid, 
trans-scientific and trans-legal — so, they cannot be solely solved by Law, 
science or technology. The importance of the ability of lawyers to work in an 
interdisciplinary and collaborative way with other areas is already 
professionally and academically recognized, but that ability seems to be poorly 
translated for the student. With the increasing fluidity of knowledge and 
professional functions, the need for interdisciplinarity is the most pressing 

Legal Education in the 21st century and the Artificial Intelligence 
 
12 •   R. Opin. Jur., Fortaleza, ano 19, n. 31, p.1-32, maio/ago. 2021 
 
one, maybe. In this sense, working along a variety of disciplines is 
fundamental to deal with the phenomenon of Law as an adequate field of 
investigation, and not as an epistemologically isolated discipline. It is essential 
for legal professions to become increasingly similar to other professional 
branches (i.e. business management, design, and medicine), in which social 
and computer scientists, ethics specialists, economists, organization theorists, 
among others, would have much to teach and collaborate in building theories 
and solving practical problems; 
 
c) reflection on design: the crisis of several legal institutions today, such as access 
to justice, and the timing of lawsuits’ processing, is a problem both of 
resources using and structural legal design. Thinking about Law as a design 
problem includes criticizing the role of legal technology. Technology in 
general has been presented as a design solution, and there is undoubtedly a 
lot of effort in using technology to solve real-world problems. But much of 
that work is being used to produce localized fixes for very specific problems. 
One should also reflect on the systemic consequences of the reconstruction 
of Law around disparate and often disconnected technological solutions. 
Agile, problem-oriented and tool-driven design is welcome, but it should not 
replace larger policy approaches to institutional design and rules. Legal 
courses should play a central role in initiating and shaping those topics, 
which go beyond events by Law programmers and applications. Legal design 
laboratories may present a good institutional model, facilitating design-
oriented teaching and research, although they may be limited if they focus 
very narrowly on the design of technology and tools as their main modus 
operandi.1 
 
d) ethics and Governance: ethics can be considered a key and unifying aspect of 
the branches of knowledge that are intertwined to shape a technological 
future in which well-being will be increasingly dependent on ICTs. Perhaps 
the main ethical challenge is intrinsic to the nature of the technology itself — 
mainly its tendency to seek greater flexibility and efficiency on its own. In a 
hyperconnected world, individuals not only use technology, they are also 
being used by it. This has significant implications for what it means to be 
human and a legal person. The obnubilation of the subject-object 
relationship between humans and technology under conditions of 
hyperconnectivity is an inevitable characteristic of life, and the obsolescence, 
                                                 
1 For a deeper discussion on the importante of design of technological Solutions for Law, see the text by 
Hagan (2020), Design comes to the Law School. 

Mateus de Oliveira Fornasier 
R. Opin. Jur., Fortaleza, ano 19, n. 31, p.1-32, maio/ago. 2021 •    13 
 
in the face of technology, of various notions that underlie the meaning of the 
human, is irreversible. A critical issue for governance, therefore, is the way in 
which human reification is addressed and/or managed in the emerging and 
post-human information age. Thus, Law courses should reflect on the ways 
through which lawyers contribute to the construction of the republican and 
participatory subject, even in the face of such great challenges — in order, 
thus, to become professionals capable of providing unique and typical legal 
responses. The skills to recognize and engage in policy debates, as well as to 
properly advise on a variety of Law and governance solutions will also be 
important for the future legal professional, then. 
 
e) skills are not (yet) easy: although the focus on training in a hyperconnected 
environment is reinforced, this should not replace the development of 
essential critical thinking skills and creative problem solving. Such capabilities 
can be even more critical for legal work, as automation constantly reduces the 
need for a deep human knowledge of Law as it is currently known. 
Bennett-Moses’s (2019) proposal for legal education — not only in the sense of 
training for the professional future, but rather, as the development of citizenship in an 
automated and digital world — goes through several pragmatic changes. For example, 
updating legal curricula should absorb disciplines in statistics and modeling to take into 
account more recent examples of data processing. In addition to basic statistics, students 
should be taught about the different ways through which data can be analyzed and used 
to draw inferences or make predictions. 
 
 
2.2INTERDISCIPLINARITY FOR LAWYERS UNDERSTOOD AS “TRANSITION 
ENGINEERS” 
 
In addition to adjustments to course content, broad, interdisciplinary thinking 
based on problems in important contemporary issues should have a place in education 
— for example, ethical considerations for data-based inferences and decision-making in 
Court sentences, policing, assessment of policy proposals to manage climate change, etc. 
This would encourage students to understand how knowledge from many different 
disciplines feed themselves back and combine to address important contemporary 
problems. It is worth remembering that AI as it is currently being developed is efficient 
for single tasks such as equation solving, but it is still very ineffective in tasks that 
require creativity. As creativity and interdisciplinary skills will continue to be human 
domains for longer than expected, they constitute the basis for interesting training for 
the human professionals of the future. 

Legal Education in the 21st century and the Artificial Intelligence 
 
14 •   R. Opin. Jur., Fortaleza, ano 19, n. 31, p.1-32, maio/ago. 2021 
 
Historically, lawyers have been more important when they operate as “transaction 
engineers”, who create opportunities for new forms of business and other social 
relationships (FENWICK; KAAL; VERMEULEN, 2020, p. 107-108). Lawyers design 
innovative contracts, which protect high-risk investors, by intermediating the 
relationship between investors and innovative ventures created by inexperienced 
entrepreneurs — and in a scenario of disruptive technologies developed by startups, 
those activities are very important. In addition, the work lawyers do in establishing 
agreements, partnerships and conflict resolution has also been an important 
classification device for entrepreneurs who need more than just investors to start and 
scale their businesses. And contractual mechanisms, as well as the reputation-dominated 
market for lawyers, reduce information asymmetries between entrepreneurs and 
investors — which are necessary to bring together the demand and supply side of venture 
capital in an effective and mutually advantageous way. 
The performance of the “transaction engineer” role that lawyers can play will 
require knowledge of coding — mainly due to the growing importance of information 
technologies in legal practice (FENWICK; KAAL; VERMEULEN, 2020, p. 110). Legal 
Tech — platforms, databases, software, applications and IT services to assist lawyers, 
which may even involve AI and blockchain technology — is changing the way Law is 
practiced. The success of such technologies, as well as of the start-ups that develop them, 
will very soon replace much of the work of trainees and beginning lawyers — such as 
proofreading, writing, etc. — as those autonomous services do not suffer from human 
flaws when performing repetitive tasks. Legal Tech can quickly transform Law offices 
and departments into virtual offices — platforms with an emphasis on connecting legal 
and other professionals in a collaborative online environment, involving human actors 
and machines. When successful, the platform model will create a flexible and accessible 
community of professionals with different skills and experience. The larger the 
community, the easier it is to offer customized solutions for customers’ needs. 
The development of digital technologies transforms practices for which lawyers 
are trained (ERSHOVA et al., 2019, p. 148). For example, legislative activity has long 
been focused on the preparation of regulatory legal acts. But the introduction of new 
financial technologies — cryptocurrencies and blockchain, AI, virtual commerce and 
robotic consulting — has required the development of new regulatory models that 
include non-traditional stages that are completely different from legislation. And the 
development of financial technologies and services has demonstrated the impossibility 
of traditional legal regulation to create their legal regulatory base. Thus, what should be 
thought of, in terms of conduct regulation, is the development of applied structure 
solutions, which provide for a rapid implementation of innovative technologies and 

Mateus de Oliveira Fornasier 
R. Opin. Jur., Fortaleza, ano 19, n. 31, p.1-32, maio/ago. 2021 •    15 
 
services. Therefore, the competencies established by State standards for legal education 
must be carried out on the basis of digitization. 
A much better technical understanding of the main technologies involving 
computers, communication networks and AI will be needed not only for legal 
education. Coding and data analysis seem like a good starting point, but other 
important subject-specific skills and abilities are also needed in a changing world. 
Therefore, the development of skills that lead to better decision making in conditions of 
cognitive and normative uncertainty must take place. Three skills which  distinguish 
legal thinking and are relevant to digital transformation can be described as it follows 
(FENWICK; KAAL; VERMEULEN, 2020, p. 114): 
 
a) complex problem solving: legal thinking deals with creative problem solving, 
involving complex facts through criticism, analysis and application — which 
are useful skills for future challenges; 
 
b) incentive-based thinking: legal rationality involves studying the impact of norms 
on human behavior. Incentive-based thinking can be powerful in the digital 
age, in which traditional systems, models and assumptions will be revised, 
and thinking about the effects of technological architecture on human 
behavior will be crucial for the best architecture; 
 
c) narrative and persuasion: due to the frequent plurality of possible answers to 
legal problems, a convincing narrative is important for the knowledge of the 
decision maker’s opinion. This matches the needs of a digital world in which 
the best solution is not totally visible. 
Thomson’s (2020) understanding of legal education in times of disruption caused 
by technological advances is that, at first, changes have more to do with ways of assisting 
the work of Law operators (tools, applications, new forms of communication, intelligent 
assistants, etc.) — being that the types of work to be carried out are affected, but not its 
essence. That is, legal education will need to adapt to those changes, but the primary 
skills taught by the Law school will still be useful and necessary in a legal world 
complexed by ICTs and assisted by AI. In fact, AI applications are already promoting a 
wide range of legal, economic and social implications (DIAMOND et al., 2018). As AI 
offers opportunities to reduce or eliminate routine and time-consuming tasks with e-
discovery, contract review and other traditional attorney roles, the most innovative Law 
operators adapt to take advantage of new opportunities. Improving the prediction of 
legal outcomes is an example of leveraging AI in the legal profession to better 
understand data. 
Big data, AI, e-discovery tools, document automation, communication and 
collaboration tools, and cloud-based case management systems constitute only a sample 
of the ways in which technology is transforming legal practice in the 21st century 

Legal Education in the 21st century and the Artificial Intelligence 
 
16 •   R. Opin. Jur., Fortaleza, ano 19, n. 31, p.1-32, maio/ago. 2021 
 
(DIAMOND et al., 2018, p. 23). That situation illustrates the fact that thirty-one states 
out of the fifty that form the USA, in 2018, already demanded from their lawyers to 
understand the risks and benefits of technology (Comment 8 of Rule 1.1 of the Model 
Rules of Professional Conduct of the American Bar Association, ABA). The State of 
Florida, for example, has added a requirement for continuing legal education for 
technology. 
Best advocacy practices in the social media age include informing clients about 
the responsible use of social media when representing and developing comprehensive 
social media policies. Lawyers must already deal with the use of social media in a variety 
of contexts, including the multiparty court, and they will have to change their 
traditional advocacy structure to include social media from the initial entry of clients to 
the completion of a case. After the admission of each case, lawyers must provide careful 
client advice on social media in the digital age. This includes recommendations on not 
publishing information and opinions related to pending litigation on social media for 
example, and this is reflected in legal education, which should include, both in 
undergraduate and refresher courses in Law, for example, advice on postures in social 
media. 
Leskova, Serova and Lukyanova (2019), when analyzing the main trends in 
approaches to economic and legal education in the context of the digitalization of 
society, point to the need for new competences and skills to be also needed in Master of 
Laws (LLM, or Latin Legum Magister) programs, which allow the identification 
specialized training fields, connecting practice requirements and educational standards 
for the correction of educational programs, considering the professional tasks that will 
be required in the future. To carry out their work, the authors comparatively analyzed 
training programs for managers and lawyers at universities inside and outside Russia, 
and concluded that, in the context of the digital economy, LLM must offer knowledge 
in the field of modern information technology, interdisciplinary tools for solving 
professional tasks, comprehensive thinking skills and analytical skills. And the 
implementation of such innovations require the creation of stable collaborations both 
within the university and with representatives of the IT sector and the main companies 
that foresee the implementation of digital technologies. 
The development of the digital economy, therefore, makes pressure on LLMs to 
also include the study of peculiarities of the action of neural networks and distributed 
registration technologies, prediction of the legal consequences of the introduction of 
control mechanisms in relation to cryptocurrencies, etc. (LESKOVA; SEROVA; 
LUKYANOVA, 2019, p. 843). And successfully achieving the formation of new skills 
for masters, which guarantee their participation as professionals in digital markets, is 
something that demands the integration of applied elements of these phenomena in 

Mateus de Oliveira Fornasier 
R. Opin. Jur., Fortaleza, ano 19, n. 31, p.1-32, maio/ago. 2021 •    17 
 
educational programs. This problem can be solved by establishing a closer interaction 
between universities and business involved in the digital sector of the economy, such as 
the participation of students in projects associated with the cases of real companies and 
digital markets. 
 
3 ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE IN HIGHER EDUCATION 
 
Despite the changes and reforms brought to the classroom and teaching methods 
due to the evolution in hardware, software and online services, the real revolution in 
education is yet to come,  due to the use of AI (SUBRAHMANYAM; SWATHI, 2018). 
With AI, expert systems can be designed to interact with the world in ways such as visual 
perception, speech recognition and intelligent behavior, many of which were considered 
essentially human capabilities hitherto. AI would be very efficient in education, for 
example, in creating data collection algorithms to provide detailed and personalized 
feedback from students, which could make possible interpreting a student's needs and 
designing an appropriate assessment. AI systems can show student abilities, repeat 
lessons and design personalized learning plans for each student. AI would thus enable 
powerful virtual teaching assistants. 
Fast developments in information technology, such as deep learning, big data and 
neural networks, demonstrate the arrival of AI. With it, the thinking, emotion and 
social skills that were previously considered unique to the human are gradually being 
carried out by AI, and education/teaching based on these skills tend to cause profound 
changes. For Zhao and Liu (2019, p. 47), facing educational changes in the AI era is 
both a challenge and an opportunity for educators in general. 
AI will inevitably move education towards learning wisdom. The great goal of 
human use of AI is to free mankind from basic and repetitive work, to make possible to 
get involved in more important or more interesting things. But education is basically 
divided into two aspects: “teaching”, which is the transfer of knowledge, and part of the 
educator's work that AI can perform better than the human; and “education”, which is 
the cultivation of character, the incentive for students to explore the unknown, in 
discovery, in creation, and in the love of knowledge — and this part is difficult to 
substitute for AI (ZHAO; LIU, 2019, p. 50). Teachers, lecturers and professors, 
therefore, must constantly update their teaching wisdom, reflect and summarizing 
experiences, and make full use of the latest sciences and technologies in the cultivation 
of talents. 
Timms (2016, p. 701) proposes that the field of applied AI to education (AIED) 
is already mature enough to involve students in new ways of learning and teaching, and 
to help teachers teach more efficiently. The intelligent systems developed to date within 

Legal Education in the 21st century and the Artificial Intelligence 
 
18 •   R. Opin. Jur., Fortaleza, ano 19, n. 31, p.1-32, maio/ago. 2021 
 
the framework of AIED used computers and other devices that were not specific for 
education, but future technologies, designed specifically for learning and teaching, 
combining the power of AIED with robotics and sensors for monitoring environments 
and behaviors (i.e. internet of things, or IoT) will enable AIED for full use in 
classrooms. The author believes that physical schools will still exist in the coming 
decades to some extent, and teachers will continue to promote learning among students 
— but there will be cobots, teachers’ assistants in classrooms (a technology that, perhaps, 
will not be available in a few years, but that should start to be developed from now on). 
It also provides intelligent classrooms, with support sensors, with AIED applications 
built into them. 
The exploration of new possibilities of interfaces between students, teachers and 
assistive technologies, parallel to the investigation of the application of IoT in 
education, as well as robotics shaping knowledge and learning, will introduce new ways 
to detect the students’ affective states and to interact with them in different ways 
(TIMMS, 2016, p. 711). In addition, incorporating AIED into smart classrooms 
collecting data from the many sensors disposed in such an environment would require 
large amounts of educational data mining and lead to new models of perceiving student 
behavior. 
AI will reduce costs for learners, compared to the cultivation of experienced 
teachers, as it is a technology that will duplicate unlimited assistants, teachers, 
supervisors and mentors, who will influence all aspects of human life. In the near 
future, education will no longer be limited to classrooms only, and educational modes 
will be changed in teaching materials and methods — which will take place in four 
suggested stages by Wang et al. (2018, p. 155-157) : 
i) Increasing teaching efficiency: in the initial stage of the intelligence era, AI will record 
the learning results of each student, which will constitute the data analyzed by the 
assistants, and will serve as a conclusion for teachers. Based on this information 
(personality, relevant knowledge domain, learning efficiency, etc.), teachers will offer 
relevant content to each student, resulting in more effective teaching. With the 
development of technology, an “AI partner” will be available to accompany a student 
and record their data throughout their lives. Such partner will collect more complete 
data about a person and reveal more information that is often overlooked in everyday 
life, better outlining his/her personality. Furthermore, this “AI partner” will help 
students to understand their acquired knowledge more broadly and precisely — and that 
understanding obtained by the “partner” may be better than that which any human 
being would be able to obtain. At this stage, AI will not change the ways and 
opportunities through which education occurs. Nor will it transform contents, but the 
high efficiency of teaching will lead to a greater breadth and depth of the content 

Mateus de Oliveira Fornasier 
R. Opin. Jur., Fortaleza, ano 19, n. 31, p.1-32, maio/ago. 2021 •    19 
 
learned. This situation will require that universities accelerate the speed of cultivating 
composite and specialized talent in innovation, who are more aspiring and creative, 
bringing competitiveness; 
ii) Focus on cultivating student talent: time for teaching and learning is limited, but the AI 
experience can be shared. At the intermediate stage, every AI teacher can share and 
learn from many experiences to improve teaching and learning, even raising the 
standard of teachers’ wisdom. This will allow them to meet the particular requirements 
of each student, offering them personalized education, which generates equity 
throughout the process. During this stage, few changes are made to contents, but 
education providers will offer AI teachers instead of human ones. As AI teachers offer 
high quality teaching to students at low cost, the educational focus will shift from 
“teaching” to “learning”. The breadth and depth of knowledge will no longer be limited 
to “teaching”, and thus, the content and objectives of teaching will focus on the 
cultivation of talents aware of innovation, motivated and ready for learning; 
iii) Reversion of content and teaching methods: when advanced, AI will transform its role — 
ceasing to be an external tool to become an organic part. Man and machine will be 
integrated, making the human capable of learning beyond the current reach. Human/AI 
interaction will flow as much as, currently, the human obtains information through 
his/her organs (eyes, ears, etc.). Huge changes will occur in educational methods and 
content, as the memorization of diverse complicated knowledge will no longer be 
necessary, since trivial works will be performed only by AI. Knowledge, thus, will be 
acquired as easily and quickly by human beings as a download of a book, even in great 
length and depth. The breadth and depth of knowledge of this “super” man will have 
nothing to do with “teaching” or “learning”: at that stage, the “super” man’s IQ, EQ, 
personality and hobby will be identical. What a “super” man will have to do is to learn 
how to apply and control the AI integrated in him/her, and complete creative, intuitive 
and perceptual tasks, where AI is less competent than human intelligence. Thus, this 
knowledge inherent exclusively to human intelligence will be the important part of 
education at this stage. 
iv) Alterations on evaluation methods: evaluations and tests currently continue to focus on 
the memory of knowledge and methods/routines for solving problems. But AI will 
reverse this situation, more accurately assessing student performance. The ubiquitous 
“AI partner” will record a student’s entire learning process, pertinently testing his/her 
knowledge and skills, analyzing failures to formulate a learning plan that compensates 
them. In this form of learning, every student must clarify what have been learned, what 
have been mastered and what have been ignored, and semester exams and skills 
proficiency tests will be eliminated. Standardized content will no longer be evaluated, 
but open, comprehensive and interdisciplinary content. 

Legal Education in the 21st century and the Artificial Intelligence 
 
20 •   R. Opin. Jur., Fortaleza, ano 19, n. 31, p.1-32, maio/ago. 2021 
 
It is clear that the view of the authors above seems to be quite optimistic, but it 
depends on other technological advances (besides a long time), and on the adaptation of 
the whole way of life of the human being to occur. Furthermore, even if it does not 
happen exactly in the way they have proposed, it is clear that this evolutionary line can 
clarify ways in which education (including legal one) will be proposed in a more or less 
distant future, as well as launching initial parameters for a criticism and the 
development of an ethics capable of subsidizing the regulation of this process of future 
education by the theory of both Pedagogy and Law. 
The fast pace of technological innovation and the displacement of associated 
jobs, widely recognized by experts in the field of AI, implies that higher education 
requires a reconsideration of the role and pedagogies of teachers. The current use of 
technological solutions, such as “learning management systems” or IT solutions to 
detect plagiarism, already raises the question of who sets the teaching and learning 
agenda — whether companies or higher education institutions. Many sets of tasks 
currently placed at the center of higher education practice will be replaced by AI based 
on complex algorithms designed by programmers that can convey their own biases or 
agendas in operating systems. Continued criticism and research (mainly related to 
ethics) in the proposed solutions are thus crucial to ensure that universities remain 
institutions capable of promoting and developing knowledge and wisdom (POPENICI; 
KERR, 2017, p. 32-33). Thus, universities need to rethink their pedagogical functions 
and models, as well as their future relationship with AI solutions and their owners. In 
addition, higher education institutions are facing the vast record of possibilities and 
challenges opened up by the opportunity to adopt AI in teaching and learning. Such 
solutions present new openings for education for all, promoting lifelong learning in a 
strengthened model that can preserve the integrity of fundamental values and the 
purpose of higher education. 
Major advances in AI theory and applications expected in the coming decades 
mean that the current workforce in all sectors will have to prepare for a possible 
substitutive effect. For He, Shen and Xin (2020, p. 56), AI will have a strictly negative 
impact on low-skilled work, but its influence is still undefined on high-skilled work. 
Adequate AI-related education, however, is able to mitigate negative effects. Thus, they 
outline an assessment of three basic skills cultivated in AI education — cooperation, 
communication and manipulation. For undergraduates highly susceptible to the 
influence of AI on placement in the job market, more efforts are needed by universities 
and companies to help them adapting to the future AI work environment. A list of 
higher education courses (from the Chinese organization of such courses) that need to 
incorporate computer science teaching is proposed by the authors (HE; SHEN; XIN, 
2020, p. 51): 

Mateus de Oliveira Fornasier 
R. Opin. Jur., Fortaleza, ano 19, n. 31, p.1-32, maio/ago. 2021 •    21 
 
Categories 
Courses 
Agriculture 
Forestry, Animal Husbandry, Fishing 
Arts 
Music, Drama, Cinema, Design 
Economic Sciences 
Economy, Public Finances, Finances 
Education 
Pedagogy, Physical Education 
Engineering 
Mechanical Engineering, Materials Science, Energy, Electrical Engineering 
History 
History, Archeology 
Information Engineering 
Automation, Computer Science, Architecture, Environmental Sciences, Mining, 
Transports, Aerospace Engineering, Nuclear Science 
Law 
Law, Political Science, Sociology, Ethnology 
Literature 
Literature, Journalism 
Administration Sciences 
Business Management, Public Administration, Operations Research, Electronic 
Commerce 
Medical Sciences 
Basic Medicine, Clinical Medicine, Public Health, Traditional Medicine 
Philosophy 
Philosophy, Logic, Religious Studies 
Sciences 
Mathematics, Physics, Chemistry, Astronomy, Geography, Atmospheric Sciences, 
Geology, Psychology, Biology 
Source: (HE; SHEN; XIN, 2020, p. 51). 
 
In relation to the professions described above, all of which are highly qualified, 
none has a susceptibility to automation greater than 50% in job positions. But, focusing 
on the most typical professions of Law graduates — Advocacy and Judiciary — the 
authors present that, according to Chinese reality, about 15.8% is the degree of 
susceptibility to automation (HE; SHEN; XIN, 2020, p. 52). It is clear that these data 
are very specific to the Chinese reality, quite different from the Brazilian one, for 
example (be it in relation to the political regime, demography, the form of socialization 
and political organization, the jobs that are actually occupied by graduates in Law 
beyond the traditional ones, and several other factors). It is also true that in Brazil a 
large part (perhaps the largest) of Law graduates are placed in Public Administration and 
Judiciary auxiliary positions, in very different professions. However, these data already 
serve to illustrate probabilities and encourage research related to other national 
contexts. Such results, however, demonstrate that (HE; SHEN; XIN, 2020, p. 50): i) 
interactive communication skills between humans, as well as between humans and 
machines, should be emphasized in higher education; ii) creativity is a weapon against 
computing and the substitution effect of AI. 
Many traditional instructional methods are based on presenting facts and 
concepts followed by test questions to students, but AI involves capturing and mastering 

Legal Education in the 21st century and the Artificial Intelligence 
 
22 •   R. Opin. Jur., Fortaleza, ano 19, n. 31, p.1-32, maio/ago. 2021 
 
knowledge, providing power of intelligent assessment and feedback, among others 
(BELE, 2018, p. 24). AI in a specific area makes education highly interactive, accessible 
and individualized. E-learning is the learning delivered or activated via electronic 
technology, and it encompasses learning through a variety of technologies (i.e. internet, 
television, video, intelligent tutoring and computerized training). It can be of great value 
when used as part of a well-planned and adequately supported education/training 
environment, but it does not replace or render existing traditional educational theories 
and approaches obsolete. An intelligent tutoring system (ITS) provides immediate and 
personalized instructions to students, usually without requiring the intervention of a 
human teacher, as in online teaching. While it is very difficult to provide a personal 
training assistant for each student, a virtual training assistant that captures the subjects 
and teaching experience of experienced coaches can be an interesting route. This kind 
of system has been adopted by researchers in education, psychology and AI. The ITS can 
also be classified by the model tracking tutor algorithm. One of the goals of ITS is to 
adopt hypermedia courses for each user, by controlling the level of learning, the 
navigation of the course, reviewing the available information, and reviewing the training 
and its methodology, explaining errors, answering questions, student advice, etc. In 
other words, ITS allows the student to be taught content, offered an assessment and also 
for education to be adapted to the student’s performance. ITS thus creates a learning 
environment in which the role of human teachers is largely replaced by the tutor 
module and the domain knowledge module (BELE, 2018, p. 25). A system plans and 
teaches individuals, maintaining the belief inn each student module and acting 
according to the best teaching strategy. ITS can also be classified by the model tracking 
tutor algorithm. 
Educational technology companies (EdTechs) are implementing emotional AI to 
quantify social and emotional learning, in facial coding methodologies that use 
algorithms and computer vision to see, recognize, categorize and learn about facial 
expressions of emotion — and McStay (2019) assesses the nascent use of these 
technologies in education, demonstrating that there is a clash between public and 
private interests in the use of such technologies in the face of both the rights of students 
and the point of view of the effectiveness of the technology. The author’s position is 
that, at a first glance, the use of AI technologies to assist teachers in their activities is not 
problematic. Furthermore, emotional AI is not seen as being something naturally 
unethical as well. However, there are several methodological, legal and normative 
problems with emotional AI technology, especially in relation to applications based on 
facial coding (MCSTAY, 2019, p. 12). Firstly, effectiveness, validity and 
representativeness of facial data used for training emotional AI are questionable — that 
is, it is plausible to raise doubts about the certainty of the results obtained with the 

Mateus de Oliveira Fornasier 
R. Opin. Jur., Fortaleza, ano 19, n. 31, p.1-32, maio/ago. 2021 •    23 
 
analysis of the facial data of those submitted to the technology. Furthermore, the quest 
for the well-being of students (especially if they are children of school age) may not be 
aligned with a situation in which their facial expressions are stored and evaluated. In 
other words, mining the students’ emotional life could be considered wrong from an 
ethical point of view, especially when the extraction of values from these procedures 
does not serve their well-being. Finally, it is problematic to use inferences about learners’ 
emotions to train neural networks deployed for other commercial purposes (such as 
advertising). In other words, it is very plausible to think about the possibility of 
deviations in the scope of obtaining the data, since this information obtained in the 
teaching environment can be used for other socially determining purposes (such as 
social scoring). As a result, there must be principles of minimizing data collection that 
should serve to question the extent to which emotional AI is necessary for successful 
education. 
Interdisciplinary research in the learning sciences has been helping to understand 
the way humans learn, and the result of such research is an improved understanding of 
the best way to teach and to train people. From now on, this same type of knowledge 
should better inform the development of AI for use in education. This type of 
understanding better positions the design of AI algorithms capable of analyzing 
advanced educational data at high speed, but also, in a more individualized way for 
students. However, most commercial AI developers know little about learning or 
teaching. Thus, Luckin and Cukurova (2019, p. 2824) argue that, to ensure that AI 
technologies in education incorporate the careful analysis and knowledge obtained by 
the learning sciences, partnerships between teaching stakeholders (developers, AI 
educators and researchers) should be established. 
Partnerships that support co-design among stakeholders provide a method for 
bringing research and practice worlds together in the learning sciences with those who 
develop AI for use in education and training. The proliferation of AI development for 
education adds an even more urgent need for stakeholder approaches, making it 
necessary to ensure that educators can help AI developers better understand teaching 
and learning. It should also be ensured that AI developers can support educators and 
trainers to better understand AI and its application in education. In addition, there is 
an interdisciplinary partnership between stakeholders that can be used to ensure that AI 
offers some of the educational benefits that its application promises in other areas. 
However, caution is also needed with regard to the way in which these partnerships are 
established, as large technology companies already dominate much of the EdTech 
scenario — and thus it is essential that they do not monopolize the relationship with 
educators, which can lead to a very biased and restricted educational AI future. 

Legal Education in the 21st century and the Artificial Intelligence 
 
24 •   R. Opin. Jur., Fortaleza, ano 19, n. 31, p.1-32, maio/ago. 2021 
 
Therefore, diversity of brands/companies that supply and develop EdTech, as well as the 
technologies themselves, is essential.2 
 
3.1 ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE IN LEGAL EDUCATION 
 
An interesting analogy can be drawn between the importance of introducing AI 
into Law and the discovery of Justinian's Digest — which revealed the immense and 
sophisticated corpus of Roman Law to those who lived under customary orders from 
European kingdoms and regions of the 11th century, influenced the development of 
Canon Law and, consequently, much of what is currently understood by Law in the 
West (MAHARG, 2017). But the Digesto presented enormous problems of information 
overload for students, teachers and professionals: how was all this new knowledge to be 
interpreted, taught and learned, disseminated, practiced? New forms of legal learning 
were developed, as well as new and sophisticated forms of academic and professional 
texts. Students have become qualified readers of such professional forms of legal texts to 
enter legal learning. 
In this sense, a free application called LawBot, a chatbot designed by Cambridge 
Law students, proposes to advise victims of crimes about their rights. That initiative, 
together with the idea of students organizing their learning as a public good, goes to the 
heart of what universities are about, going back to the foundation of the first 
universities: in Bologna (1080s), students, not monks , administered the university. They 
developed the new universitas, negotiated their rights and obligations with government 
officials, disciplined themselves, organized teaching and assessment, hired academics, 
etc. Students were linked to the university in ways almost inconceivable in the current 
way. 
Law students must have a basic understanding of the current state of AI and its 
likely short-term impact on Law — which will give them the opportunity to guide their 
careers to avoid the legal occupations most vulnerable to automation and to focus on 
activities for which their education and skills are valuable (SURDEN, 2017). In general, 
the tendency of AI has been the automation of highly structured and repetitive tasks, or 
with discernible underlying patterns — in machine learning, for example, focused on 
pattern detection algorithms in large amounts of data to automate various tasks 
(automated product recommendations, credit card fraud detection, etc.). 
                                                 
2 On the dangers of technocracy and the need to democratize technological development in legal 
education, see the text by Maharg (2020) Same As It Ever Was? Technocracy, Democracy and the Design of 
Discipline-Specific Digital Environments. 

Mateus de Oliveira Fornasier 
R. Opin. Jur., Fortaleza, ano 19, n. 31, p.1-32, maio/ago. 2021 •    25 
 
It is very important that students become aware of this distinction — between 
lower, repetitive tasks, and higher, creative and human activities — as the current AI is 
not yet able to replicate higher human cognitive tasks (SURDEN, 2014). Thus, future 
legal operators will be able to dedicate themselves more to activities that require higher-
order cognitive skills (legal analysis, judgment, advice to clients, construction of new 
legal and political arguments, and complex writing) and not to mechanical, repetitive 
and routine ones.  
When observing the current state of the art, the potential and implications of 
applying AI to various professional profiles of Law and politics (lawyers, judges, 
prosecutors, police, forensic scientists, members of public or corporate professional 
bodies, etc.), it is clear that legal practice has not yet adopted such technologies deeply 
and comprehensively, but there is a potential for the adoption of tools based on it 
(NISSAN, 2019, p. 459). Digital tools based on weak AI have been developed to help 
solving problems faced by lawyers. It is then a matter of Law professionals deciding what 
to buy. The ordinary citizen remains dependent on human lawyers. Legal systems have 
not yet been changed by the available AI technology. There are negotiation tools 
designed to relieve users from incurring litigation costs (such as the Australian Family 
Law specialist Split Up system) and software self-help kits for writing a valid last will and 
testament or declaration. Tools to be used by members of the public run risks similar to 
self-representation in Court when assistance from no attorney is available. For both legal 
professionals and the police, AI tools can help  understanding the context in which they 
work, but decisions are still made based on unequal power and unequal access to 
information: money can buy the power of proper legal argument, what puts the poorest 
at a disadvantage, and the general trend of policies at the global and national level, 
makes it very likely that this disadvantage will increase. This is not a problem caused by 
the technology itself, but by the social and political contexts in which the technology is 
being developed for potential buyers and with economic disincentives for access to 
members of the general public. 
A new type of advanced legal education is needed, recognizing the impact of AI 
and not clinging to technological neutrality (SJÖBERG, 2019, p. 185-186). Such a legal 
education must have teachers and students open to learning and understanding the 
legal implications of algorithms in various digital environments — which leads to yet 
another area of studies and research: information security, a scarce field of lawyers, 
despite of confidentiality issues, integrity and availability, which are critical factors for 
the success of reliable AI.  
Furthermore, for jurists, the technological vocabulary of AI is very difficult (i.e. 
cognitive computing, neural networks, natural language processing, big data repositories, 
data mining, machine learning, etc.), and about that difficulty, we highlight the dynamic 

Legal Education in the 21st century and the Artificial Intelligence 
 
26 •   R. Opin. Jur., Fortaleza, ano 19, n. 31, p.1-32, maio/ago. 2021 
 
AI-based algorithms, which are self-learning and self-modifying during the operation of 
an already implemented system. In this digital environment, it is very difficult to defend 
the Rule of Law, for exemple. Despite such difficulty, currently the management of 
digital resources is part of the legal profession, internally and externally in relation to 
the legal domain. Balancing interests against substantive rights requires up-to-date 
education and training in this regard, as well as expanding the methodological approach 
to include AI-based methods. The academic fields of IT Law and Legal Technology offer 
a theoretical framework for those types of studies. AI has the potential to improve the 
management of digital resources, but this requires legal education and a comprehensive 
analysis of how a legal system is built. 
 
4 CONCLUDING REMARKS 
 
Legal education has to be epistemologically redesigned — leaving the 
“retrospective” model in a dogmatic past (which applied past solutions to present and 
future problems, with teacher-authorities with all knowledge), and assuming a 
“prospective/projective” model, with the prioritization of the development of skills for 
dealing with complex problems and the construction of alternatives that do not exist 
hitherto. 
To this redesigned model, an interdisciplinary perspective must be added, 
including knowledge that is not traditionally part of the jurist’s repertoire. Coding and 
use of new technologies, in addition to the communicative capacity (working 
collaboratively) should be the focus of a legal education capable of offering the future 
professional alternatives and skills to deal with the new technological social reality. The 
focus on interdisciplinarity must also aim to recent innovations already put into 
practice, not only in an explanatory way, but also, in a way in which the development of 
students’ creative, prospective and projective skills takes place based on their use and 
reasoning. Blockchain, AI, smart contracts, databases and quantitative methodologies 
(among others) must be combined with the training legal typical skills and capabilities 
(which continue to have their importance in the new digitalized world), so that new 
solutions are found for new problems. 
All those capabilities should serve for the legal operator to perform not only 
traditional technical work, but, primarily, to provide reliability to new features that are 
created by and for technologies. Technological disruptions must be understood and 
systematized according to the critical and constructive reasoning that differentiates Law 
from other areas of knowledge. Creativity and interdisciplinarity are still (and may 
remain for a long time) human domains, which, unlike single and repetitive tasks, 
cannot be exercised by autonomous systems. The new skills and competencies 

Mateus de Oliveira Fornasier 
R. Opin. Jur., Fortaleza, ano 19, n. 31, p.1-32, maio/ago. 2021 •    27 
 
demanded by the change in the current scenario, marked by the emergence of a digital 
economy, do not refer only to undergraduate programs as well. Creativity, 
interdisciplinarity, collaborative work and a shift to a prospective and projective focus 
on legal education are skills and knowledge that must also be integrated into LLMs, 
PhD and postgraduate programs in general. 
There are authors whose studies on the application of AI to education lead to 
very optimistic conclusions. In those visions, greater efficiency of the teaching and 
learning processes would be obtained through more detailed knowledge of the students’ 
behavior and emotions, with the use of robotics, deep learning and IoT (among other 
technologies addressed in an interdisciplinary way), since a more individualized teaching 
(in relation to the particular needs of each student) could be offered. On the other 
hand, it is taken for granted by other authors that less qualified professions, with 
repetitive, mechanical activities, will be replaced by AI. But more qualified professions, 
dependent on higher education, have an even less defined future. In this sense, there are 
authors who believe that teaching programming and coding even in courses that 
traditionally do not involve cutting-edge technology, added to the valorization of human 
creative and communicative capacities could avoid the clash of the professions 
corresponding to these formations caused by the substitution effect brought about by 
the development of AI. 
Collection and processing data about students’ personality and behavior by AI is 
not necessarily a bad thing. However, there is a great risk of misuse of such data — that 
is, 
what 
would 
initially 
be 
stored 
and 
analyzed 
for 
the 
purpose 
of 
personalizing/individualizing curricula and methodologies could be used for other 
purposes, such as commercial and political. Thus, the development of these 
technologies (which can of course be of great value when used for the purpose of 
making the education process more precise and efficient) must be accompanied by deep 
critical reflections on their means and effects, so that a standardization (which involves 
the construction of ethical-legal rules and principles, but must go beyond that) befitting 
its complexity can be built. 
It is necessary to ensure that the same interdisciplinary approach that has enabled 
greater knowledge about human learning continues to be cultivated, in order to be 
incorporated into educational AI. Thus, partnerships between educators and business 
that develop educational AI must occur, in order to integrate them more and more into 
this great enterprise. On the other hand, there is a need for a conscious regulation of 
the great possibility of monopoly of education technologies involving AI by the 
companies that develop them — at the risk of incurring a biased and restricted 
education. 

Legal Education in the 21st century and the Artificial Intelligence 
 
28 •   R. Opin. Jur., Fortaleza, ano 19, n. 31, p.1-32, maio/ago. 2021 
 
As a highly qualified area, Law and legal education are not yet under a very 
pressing possibility of substitution by AI — however, universities must make students 
aware that there are specific tasks in the legal professions that may be replaced by AI, 
and advise them to focus their skills and knowledge in areas where this technological 
form does not have a substitutive effect. Despite the difficulties that interdisciplinary 
understanding between Law and technology entails, it must be incorporated into legal 
education programs. 
Finally, it is necessary to describe the limitations related to this research. First, it 
should be noted the concentration of studies related to the use of technologies in 
education in contexts very different from the Brazilian (such as China, USA and 
Australia), which implies that the reader should consider the results presented here very 
sparingly when trying to adapt them to other contexts. And, secondly, although the 
various sources used here have brought empirical studies and quantitative approaches, 
there is still a very imaginative, prospective and subjective character of the future of AI 
in education. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
ALTWICKER, Tilmann. International Legal Scholarship and the Challenge of 
Digitalization. Chinese Journal of International Law, v. 18, n. 2, p. 217-246, 2019. 
DOI: 
https://doi.org/10.1093/chinesejil/jmz012. 
Available 
at: 
https://academic.oup.com/chinesejil/article-abstract/18/2/217/5510128?redirectedFro 
m=fulltext. Accessed in: 18 Nov. 2020. 
 
BECKER, S. A. et al. NMC Horizon Report: 2017 Higher Education Edition. Austin: 
The 
New 
Media 
Consortium, 
2017. 
Available 
at: 
https://www.learntechlib.org/p/174879/. Accessed in: 18 Nov. 2020.  
 
BELE, Sanghesh B. Contribution of Artificial Intelligence to the E-learning. 
International Research Journal of Innovations in Engineering and Technology 
(IRJIET), v. 2, n. 5, p. 24-27, 2018.  
 
BENNETT MOSES, Lyria. Helping Future Citizens Navigate an Automated, Datafied 
World. 
UNSW 
Law 
Research 
Paper, 
n. 
19-28, 
2019. 
Available 
at: 
https://ssrn.com/abstract=3370016. Accessed in: 18 Nov. 2020. 
 
DIAMOND, Randy J. et al. Let's Teach Our Students Legal Technology... But What 
Should We Include? AALL Spectrum, v. 23, n. 1, p. 23-28, 2018. 
 

Mateus de Oliveira Fornasier 
R. Opin. Jur., Fortaleza, ano 19, n. 31, p.1-32, maio/ago. 2021 •    29 
 
ERSHOVA, Inna V. et al. The Phenomenon of Digitization in Legal Business 
Education. In: POPKOVA, Elena G. (ed.). Ubiquitous Computing and the Internet of 
Things: Prerequisites for the Development of ICT. Cham: Springer, 2019. p. 145-152. 
 
FENWICK, Mark; KAAL, Wulf A.; VERMEULEN, Erik P. M. Legal Education in a 
Digital Age: Why Coding Matters for the Lawyer of the Future. In: COMPAGNUCCI, 
Marcelo Corrales et al. (ed.). Legal Tech and the New Sharing Economy. Singapore: 
Springer, 2020. p. 103-122. 
 
FUNDAÇÃO GETÚLIO VARGAS. Exame de ordem em números. 2016. v. 3. 
Available at: https://fgvprojetos.fgv.br/sites/fgvprojetos.fgv.br/files/oab_3_edicao_v4_ 
web_espelhado.pdf. Accessed in: 18 Nov. 2020.  
 
GUILHERME, Alex. AI and education: the importance of teacher and student 
relations. AI & Society, v. 34, p. 47-54, 2019. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s00146-
017-0693-8. Available at: https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007%2Fs00146-017-
0693-8. Accessed in: 18 Nov. 2020. 
 
HAGAN, Margaret. Design comes to the Law School. In: DENVIR, Catrina (ed.). 
Modernising Legal Education. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2020. p. 109-
125. 
 
HE, 
Wenqing; 
SHEN, 
Yifan; 
XIN, 
Ying. 
AI 
Education 
for 
Everyone: 
How to Integrate Future Labor Force into Digital Frontier? In: KOKURYO, Jiro; 
MARACKE, Catharina; WALSH, Toby Walsh. AI for Everyone: benefitting from and 
building trust in the technology. [S.l.]: AI Access, 2020. p. 41-56. Available at: 
http://www.cse.unsw.edu.au/~tw/ai4everyone.pdf. Accessed in: 18 Nov. 2020. 
 
HOOKWAY, Branden. Interface. Cambridge, London: MIT University Press, 2014. 
 
KOEBLER, Jason. Rise of the Robolawyers: how legal representation could come to 
resemble 
TurboTax. 
The 
Atlantic, 
Apr. 
2017. 
Available 
at: 
https://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/2017/04/rise-of-the-robolawyers/5177 
94/. Accessed in: 18 Nov. 2020. 
 
LEGG, Michael. New Skills for New Lawyers: Responding to Technology and Practice 
Developments (January 1, 2018). The Future of Australian Legal Education (Thomson 
Reuters 
2018); 
UNSW 
Law 
Research 
No. 
18-51. 
Available 
at: 
https://ssrn.com/abstract=3235075. Accessed in: 18 Nov. 2020. 
 
LESKOVA, Yulia G.; SEROVA, Olga A.; LUKYANOVA, Natalia Y. Master’s 
Educational Programs in the Context of the Digital Economy: Main Trends. In: 

Legal Education in the 21st century and the Artificial Intelligence 
 
30 •   R. Opin. Jur., Fortaleza, ano 19, n. 31, p.1-32, maio/ago. 2021 
 
POPKOVA, Elena G. (ed.). Ubiquitous Computing and the Internet of Things: 
prerequisites for the Development of ICT. Cham: Springer, 2019. p. 835-844. 
 
LUCKIN, Rosemary; CUKUROVA, Mutlu. Designing educational technologies in the 
age of AI: A learning sciences-driven approach. British Journal of Educational 
Technology, v. 50, n. 6, p. 2824-2838, 2019. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1111/bjet.12861. 
Available at: https://bera-journals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/bjet.128 
61. Accessed in: 18 Nov. 2020.  
 
MAHARG, Paul. Let’s get digital: Paul Maharg explores the potential for AI & legal 
education. 
New 
Law 
Journal, 
2017. 
Available 
at: 
https://www.newlawjournal.co.uk/content/let-s-get-digital-0.  Accessed in: 18 Nov. 
2020. 
 
MAHARG, Paul. Same As It Ever Was? Technocracy, Democracy and the Design of 
Discipline-Specific Digital Environments. In: DENVIR, Catrina (ed.). Modernising 
Legal Education. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2020. p. 147-165. 
 
MCSTAY, Andrew. Emotional AI and EdTech: serving the public good? Learning, 
Media 
and 
Technology, 
p. 
1-14, 
2019. 
DOI: 
https://doi.org/10.1080/17439884.2020.1686016. 
Available 
at: 
https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/17439884.2020.1686016. 
Accessed 
in: 18 Nov. 2020. 
 
MIRONOVA, Svetlana; BOGDANOVA, Tamara; SIMONOVA, Svetlana. The 
introduction of digital technologies in the educational process of training lawyers. SHS 
Web 
of 
Conferences, 
v. 
69, 
n. 
79, 
p. 
1-6, 
2019. 
DOI: 
https://doi.org/10.1051/shsconf/20196900079. 
Available 
at: 
https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007%2Fs00146-015-0596-5. Accessed in: 18 Nov. 
2020. 
 
NISSAN, Ephraim. Digital technologies and artificial intelligence’s present and 
foreseeable impact on lawyering, judging, policing and law enforcement. AI & Society, 
v. 32, p. 441-464, 2017. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s00146-015-0596-5. Available at: 
https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007%2Fs00146-015-0596-5. Accessed in: 18 Nov. 
2020. 
 
POPENICI, Stefan A. D. ; KERR, Sharon. Exploring the impact of artificial intelligence 
on teaching and learning in higher education. Research and Practice in Technology 
Enhanced Learning, v. 12, n. 1, p. 22-35, 2017. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1186/s41039-
017-0062-8. Available at: https://telrp.springeropen.com/articles/10.1186/s41039-017-
0062-8. Accessed in: 18 Nov. 2020. 
 

Mateus de Oliveira Fornasier 
R. Opin. Jur., Fortaleza, ano 19, n. 31, p.1-32, maio/ago. 2021 •    31 
 
SJÖBERG, Cecilia Magnusson. Legal Automation: AI and Law Revisited. In: 
CORRALES, Marcelo; FENWICK, Mark; HAAPIO, Helena (eds.). Legal Tech, Smart 
Contracts and Blockchain. Cingapura: Springer, 2019. p. 173-187. DOI: 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-13-6086-2_7. 
Available 
at: 
https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007%2F978-981-13-6086-2_7. Accessed in: 18 
Nov. 2020. 
 
SUBRAHMANYAM, V. V.; SWATHI, K. Artificial Intelligence and its Implications in 
Education. International Conference Improving Access to Distance Higher Education 
Focus Underserved Communities Uncovered Reg. Kakatiya University, p. 1-11, 2018. 
Available 
at: 
https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Vv_Subrahmanyam/publication/328686410_Art
ificial_Intelligence_and_its_Implications_in_Education/links/5bdbe824a6fdcc3a8db78
f8e/Artificial-Intelligence-and-its-Implications-in-Education.pdf. Accessed in: 18 Nov. 
2020. 
 
SURDEN, Harry. Machine Learning and Law. Washington Law Review, v. 89, p. 87-
115, 2014. 
 
SURDEN, Harry. What to Teach Law Students About Artificial Intelligence and Law? 
Northwestern 
Law 
Review 
Online 
(Bridges 
II), 
2017. 
Available 
at: 
https://ssrn.com/abstract=3120123. Accessed in: 18 Nov. 2020. 
 
THE LAW SOCIETY OF NEW SOUTH WALES. Commission of Inquiry. The 
Future of Law and Innovation in the Profession (FLIP) Report. Sydney: The Law 
Society 
of 
New 
South 
Wales, 
2017. 
Available 
at: 
https://www.lawsociety.com.au/sites/default/files/2018-03/1272952.pdf. Accessed in: 
18 Nov. 2020.  
 
THOMSON, David I. C. Online Learning and the Future of Legal Education. 
University of Denver Legal Studies Research Paper, n. 20-01, p. 1-26, 2020. Available at: 
https://ssrn.com/abstract=3515416. Accessed in: 18 Nov. 2020. 
 
TIMMS, Michael J. Letting Artificial Intelligence in Education Out of the Box: 
Educational Cobots and Smart Classrooms. International Journal of Artificial 
Intelligence 
and 
Education, 
v. 
26, 
p. 
701-712, 
2016. 
DOI: 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s40593-016-0095-y. 
Available 
at: 
https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s40593-016-0095-y. Accessed in: 18 Nov. 
2020. 
 
VOCHOZKA, Marek (eds.). Digital Transformation of the Economy: Challenges, 
Trends and New Opportunities. Cham: Springer, 2020. p. 455-462. 
 

Legal Education in the 21st century and the Artificial Intelligence 
 
32 •   R. Opin. Jur., Fortaleza, ano 19, n. 31, p.1-32, maio/ago. 2021 
 
WANG, Bin et al. Artificial Intelligence and Education. In: JIN, Donghan (ed.). 
Reconstructing Our Orders. Singapore: Springer, 2018. p. 129-161. 
 
WEBB, Julian. Information technology and the future of legal education: a provocation. 
Griffith Journal of Law & Human Dignity, v. 6, n. 3, p. 72-104, 2019. Available at: 
https://griffithlawjournal.org/index.php/gjlhd/article/view/1085. Accessed in: 18 Nov. 
2020. 
 
YAVORSKIY, M. A.; MILOVA, I. E.; BOLGOVA, V. V.  Legal Education in 
Conditions of Digital Economy Development: Modern Challenges. In: ASHMARINA, 
Svetlana; MESQUITA, Anabela. The Sundarbans: A Disaster-Prone Eco-Region. [S.l.: 
s.n.], 2020. 
 
ZHAO, Yingfang; LIU, Guibao. How Do Teachers Face Educational Changes in 
Artificial Intelligence Era. Advances in Social Science, Education and Humanities 
Research (ASSEHR), v. 300, p. 47-50, 2018. DOI: https://doi.org/10.2991/erss-
18.2019.9. Available at: https://www.atlantis-press.com/proceedings/erss-18/55912681. 
Accessed in: 18 Nov. 2020. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Como citar este documento: 
 
FORNASIER, Mateus de Oliveira. Legal education in the 21st century and the artificial 
intelligence. Revista Opinião Jurídica, Fortaleza, v. 19, n. 31, p. 1-32, maio/ago. 2021. 
 
