 window.dataLayer = window.dataLayer || [];dataLayer.push({ "pf:selectedLanguage" : "English", "pf:licenseType" : "oa", "pf:sitegenUUid" : "1322817920249626639", "pf:contentCategory" : "nlm-article", "pf:associatedContentSets" : "all,BR,JDIR,jdir,2773-2363,journals-TRIAL-MEIS-2000-2026,ifp:all,all-journal-content,journals-TRIAL-MEIS-2000-2025", "pf:authorized" : "authorized", "pf:contentName" : "Scaling Artificial Intelligence for Augmented Learning: Developing a Generative AI Evaluation Scale through a Case Study in Islamic Inheritance Law", "pf:titleParentIdentifier" : "2773-2363", "pf:authenticationStatus" : "not-logged-in", "pf:chunkIdentifier" : "10.1163/27732363-20250002", "pf:contentParentName" : "Journal of Digital Islamicate Research", "pf:authAccountNumber" : "-" }); function runOnDomLoaded(f) { if (!!document.domLoaded) { setTimeout(f, 0); } else { window.addEventListener('DOMContentLoaded', f); } } Scaling Artificial Intelligence for Augmented Learning: Developing a Generative AI Evaluation Scale through a Case Study in Islamic Inheritance Law in: Journal of Digital Islamicate Research Volume 3 Issue 1 (2025) function OptanonWrapper() { } if (MathJax.Hub.Browser.isMSIE) { window.onload = function () {MathJax.Hub.Queue(["Typeset",MathJax.Hub])} } MathJax.Hub.Config({ extensions: ["MMLorHTML.js"], jax: ["input/MathML","output/CommonHTML","output/NativeMML"], extensions: ["mml2jax.js","MathMenu.js","MathZoom.js"] }); hasMathjax = true; mathjaxComplete = false; MathJax.Hub.signal.Interest( function (message) { if ('End Process' == message[0]) { mathjaxComplete = true; } } ); var NTPT_PGEXTRA = ''; var NTPT_NOINITIALTAG = true; .pageloading-mask{opacity:0.25;} .pageloading-mask{filter:alpha(opacity=25);} console.debug('Loading 5 libraries synchronously in head'); console.debug('Loading library /assets/vendor/zaa95d746/micromodal.js/micromodal.min.js synchronously in head'); console.debug('Loading library /assets/shared/z96255596/js/dist/shareLink.js synchronously in head'); console.debug('Loading library /assets/shared/z16dd3571/js/lightbox/lightbox.js synchronously in head'); console.debug('Loading library //platform-api.sharethis.com/js/sharethis.js#property=64ac08de0f9156001a2918be&amp;product=custom-share-buttons synchronously in head'); console.debug('Loading library /assets/app/z615bfb46/pages/Cite.js synchronously in head'); (function(w,d,s,l,i){w[l]=w[l]||[];w[l].push({'gtm.start': new Date().getTime(),event:'gtm.js'});var f=d.getElementsByTagName(s)[0], j=d.createElement(s),dl=l!='dataLayer'?'&amp;l='+l:'';j.async=true;j.src= '//www.googletagmanager.com/gtm.js?id='+i+dl;f.parentNode.insertBefore(j,f); })(window,document,'script','dataLayer','GTM-WF6V4F'); Jump to Content 中文 Deutsch English Login to my Brill account Create Brill Account Browse Our Titles Subjects African Studies American Studies Ancient Near East and Egypt Art History Asian Studies Biblical Studies Biology Book History and Cartography Classical Studies Education History Human Rights and Humanitarian Law International Law International Relations Jewish Studies Languages and Linguistics Life Sciences Literature and Cultural Studies Media Studies Middle East and Islamic Studies Musicology Philosophy Religious Studies Slavic and Eurasian Studies Social Sciences Theology and World Christianity Authors Becoming a Brill Author Publishing Ethics Publishing Guides Open Access General Open Access Information For Authors For Academic Societies For Librarians Research Funding Open Access Pricing Brill&rsquo;s Open Access Content Product Information Books Journals Specialty Products Metadata: Title Lists, MARC &amp; KBART Files Catalogs, Flyers and Price Lists Accessing Brill Products Company About Brill &amp; its History Imprints Careers Organization Corporate Social Responsibility News Contact Sales Contacts Ordering from Brill Editorial Contacts Offices Worlwide Press &amp; Reviews Course Adoption Contact Form Help Login to my Brill account Create Brill Account 中文 Deutsch English Browse Our Titles Subjects African Studies Education Media Studies American Studies History Middle East and Islamic Studies Ancient Near East and Egypt Human Rights and Humanitarian Law Musicology Art History International Law Philosophy Asian Studies International Relations Religious Studies Biblical Studies Jewish Studies Slavic and Eurasian Studies Biology Languages and Linguistics Social Sciences Book History and Cartography Life Sciences Theology and World Christianity Classical Studies Literature and Cultural Studies &nbsp; Authors Becoming a Brill Author Publishing Ethics Publishing Guides Open Access General Open Access Information For Authors For Academic Societies For Librarians Research Funding Open Access Pricing Brill&rsquo;s Open Access Content Product Information Books Journals Specialty Products Metadata: Title Lists, MARC &amp; KBART Files Catalogs, Flyers and Price Lists Accessing Brill Products Company About Brill &amp; its History Imprints Careers Organization Corporate Social Responsibility News Contact Sales Contacts Ordering from Brill Editorial Contacts Offices Worlwide Press &amp; Reviews Course Adoption Contact Form Search Help Share on facebook Share on linkedin Share on X Email this content Share link with colleague or librarian You can email a link to this page to a colleague or librarian: Email this content or copy the link directly: https://brill.com/view/journals/jdir/3/1/article-p5_2.xml The link was not copied. Your current browser may not support copying via this button. Link copied successfully Copy link Stay informed about this journal! Get New Issue Alerts Get Advance Article alerts Get Citation Alerts Save Share on facebook Share on linkedin Share on X Email this content Share link with colleague or librarian You can email a link to this page to a colleague or librarian: Email this content or copy the link directly: https://brill.com/view/journals/jdir/3/1/article-p5_2.xml The link was not copied. Your current browser may not support copying via this button. Link copied successfully Copy link Stay informed about this journal! Get New Issue Alerts Get Advance Article alerts Get Citation Alerts Save Scaling Artificial Intelligence for Augmented Learning: Developing a Generative AI Evaluation Scale through a Case Study in Islamic Inheritance Law In: Journal of Digital Islamicate Research Author: Dr Muhammad Zubair Abbasi Dr Muhammad Zubair Abbasi Lecturer, School of Law and Social Sciences, Royal Holloway, University of London Egham, Surrey Search for other papers by Dr Muhammad Zubair Abbasi in Current site Google Scholar Close https://orcid.org/0000-0003-1561-5457 Online Publication Date: 19 Aug 2025 Abstract Full Text PDF Metadata References Figures Metrics Abstract This study evaluates the potential of four Generative Artificial Intelligence (GenAI) models – ChatGPT-4, DeepSeek, Gemini, and Co-Pilot – to apply the principles of Islamic inheritance law. Using a GenAI Evaluation Scale ( GAIES ), the research assesses the accuracy, comprehensiveness, explainability, and authenticity of AI -generated responses on key topics, such as gender-based inheritance differences, orphaned grandchildren’s right to inheritance, and state-reformed inheritance laws in Egypt, Pakistan, and Iran. While ChatGPT-4 outperformed its counterparts, it still exhibited significant shortcomings, such as fabricated references and legal misinterpretations. To address these challenges, the study introduces a GenAI Application Scale ( GAIAS ) as a guide for the ethical use of GenAI in Islamic legal education and research. The research highlights potential risks related to AI -generated “hallucinations,” fabrications, and opaque sources, emphasizing the need for human oversight to ensure that GenAI outputs are accurate, reliable, and verifiable. Abstract This study evaluates the potential of four Generative Artificial Intelligence (GenAI) models – ChatGPT-4, DeepSeek, Gemini, and Co-Pilot – to apply the principles of Islamic inheritance law. Using a GenAI Evaluation Scale ( GAIES ), the research assesses the accuracy, comprehensiveness, explainability, and authenticity of AI -generated responses on key topics, such as gender-based inheritance differences, orphaned grandchildren’s right to inheritance, and state-reformed inheritance laws in Egypt, Pakistan, and Iran. While ChatGPT-4 outperformed its counterparts, it still exhibited significant shortcomings, such as fabricated references and legal misinterpretations. To address these challenges, the study introduces a GenAI Application Scale ( GAIAS ) as a guide for the ethical use of GenAI in Islamic legal education and research. The research highlights potential risks related to AI -generated “hallucinations,” fabrications, and opaque sources, emphasizing the need for human oversight to ensure that GenAI outputs are accurate, reliable, and verifiable. Keywords: generative AI ; Islamic inheritance law ; transparency ; accountability ; accuracy ; legal scholarship 1 Introduction The advent of generative artificial intelligence (GenAI) and large language models ( LLM s) such as ChatGPT has been likened to revolutionary technologies like the printing press, electricity, and the internet due to their unprecedented data-processing capabilities (Susskind 2025, 44–45; Wooldridge 2021, 3). However, significant concerns persist regarding their accuracy, embedded biases, and the authenticity of AI -generated knowledge (Kidd and Birhane 2023; Munn et al. 2023). The capacity of GenAI to interpret and synthesize religious texts raises critical epistemological questions about the reliability of machine-generated Islamic legal knowledge (fiqh) . This is particularly significant given that traditional Islamic scholarship derives its authority from rigorous human engagement with primary sources – the Qurʾān and ḥadīth – guided by piety, intellectual rigor, and a commitment to truth (Zaman 2002, 38–59). The rise of GenAI thus challenges longstanding scholarly norms, as algorithmic outputs lack the moral and spiritual dimensions integral to Islamic juristic tradition. Several scholars argue that current GenAI models are ill-equipped to interpret Islamic law, as they neglect the spiritual, moral, and doctrinal elements fundamental to Islamic legal reasoning (Chaudhary 2024). Concerns also include algorithmic opacity and the models’ inability to address novel legal issues requiring human judgment (Qadir and Senturk 2024). A further limitation is the lack of accessible, digitized, and machine-readable sources of Islamic law in GenAI training data (Rabb 2025). Emerging developments such as the iMufti – an AI system capable of issuing fatāwā (religious edicts) – exemplify both the potential and pitfalls of automated jurisprudence (Malik 2023). While such tools risk undermining the human-centric nature of Islamic legal authority, they also offer transformative opportunities, particularly in facilitating ijtihād (independent legal reasoning) by granting scholars rapid access to vast repositories of classical texts. Digital platforms like Maktaba Shamila and AI -powered inheritance calculators have rendered textual analysis more efficient, making technology an indispensable aid for contemporary scholars (Verkinderen 2020). While GenAI enhances the procedural aspects of ijtihād – enabling faster retrieval and synthesis of legal precedents, it cannot replicate the ethical and interpretative depth of human scholarship. The objective of this study is to evaluate the performance of GenAI models in answering Islamic inheritance law queries, assessing their accuracy in ensuring accurate distribution of shares according to classical legal principles and state-specific legal reforms. It evaluates the impact of GenAI on Islamic legal scholarship, specifically within the context of inheritance law. By focusing on Large Language Models ( LLM s) such as ChatGPT-4, DeepSeek, Gemini, and Co-Pilot, the research evaluates their performance in addressing inheritance-law related questions under Sunni and Shia jurisprudence across Egypt, Pakistan, and Iran. These countries are selected for this study due to their diverse approaches to implementing Islamic inheritance laws. As majority-Muslim countries with distinct legal systems – Pakistan’s Sunni Hanafi tradition in the common law system, Egypt’s mixed civil-Sharia framework, and Iran’s Shia-majority jurisprudence – they provide a representative sample of how Islamic inheritance rules are interpreted and applied across different schools of thought and jurisdictions. The rules governing Islamic inheritance ( ʿilm al-farāʾiḍ ) are precise and deterministic, making them well-suited for AI -driven computation. Unlike other domains of Islamic law, which often involve interpretative flexibility and juristic disagreement (ikhtilāf) , inheritance shares are explicitly defined in the Qurʾān (e.g., Q 4:11–12) with mathematical exactness. Classical jurists subsequently developed a coherent system of legal rules that leaves minimal room for subjective judgment, ensuring predictable outcomes. This computational clarity has enabled the development of online Islamic inheritance calculators, which accurately distribute shares among heirs by applying fixed juristic formulas. Empirical studies confirm that these tools not only perform calculations with precision but also transparently cite the underlying Qurʾānic verses and juristic principles (Cheema 2021). By automating a traditionally manual process, these calculators demonstrate the potential for technology to streamline Sharīʿa -compliant rulings. GenAI models go even further, responding to prompts and providing customized and personalized information based on much larger datasets. Through various inheritance scenarios, the paper tests the AI models’ ability to handle both simple and complex legal cases, such as those involving the shares of spouses, siblings, children, and grandchildren. It compares the AI -generated rulings to actual jurisprudential outcomes as prescribed by Sunni and Shia law in authoritative classical and modern treatises while also evaluating how the models recognize and integrate state-specific reforms in countries like Pakistan, Iran, and Egypt. The research methodology employs the application of two custom-designed evaluation and application tools: the GenAI Evaluation Scale ( GAIES ) and the GenAI Application Scale ( GAIAS ). The GAIES measures the accuracy of AI -generated legal information and the authenticity of the references provided; additionally, GAIAS provides guidelines for the practical use of these models for law students, scholars, and practitioners. The key findings reveal that ChatGPT-4 consistently outperformed the other models. However, it occasionally struggled to incorporate the nuances of modern legal reforms, which are essential in understanding how Islamic inheritance law is applied today. The performance of DeepSeek is similar to that of ChatGPT-4, but it falls slightly behind it. Both Gemini and Co-Pilot exhibited significantly lower accuracy, often misapplying key legal principles or failing to recognize distinctions between Sunni and Shia inheritance laws. One of the most significant issues identified across all AI models was the phenomenon of “hallucination,” where the AI produced fabricated references or incorrect information (Ji et al. 2023). 1 It raises serious concerns about accountability and transparency, as such errors can mislead users into trusting faulty legal information (Wachter 2024). In the context of Islamic inheritance law, where fairness and justice are deeply rooted in ethical and religious norms, these errors can have profound consequences (Bhojani an Schwarting 2023). This research highlights both the potential and the limitations of GenAI models in the domain of Islamic inheritance law. GenAI models like ChatGPT-4 and DeepSeek hold promise as powerful tools for assisting legal scholars and researchers; however, their limited transparency and susceptibility to errors underscore the essential need for human oversight. The study suggests that while GenAI can play a supportive role in legal research, particularly by providing quick and structured overviews, it cannot yet replace the depth and precision of understanding required for complex legal rulings. 2 2 Methodology Shortly after the release of ChatGPT-4 in March 2023, a team from Microsoft Research assessed its capabilities, posing the question: “How can we measure the intelligence of an LLM that has been trained on an unknown but extremely vast corpus of web-text data?” (Bubeck et al. 2023, 6). They aimed to probe GPT-4 ’s responses to evaluate its consistency, coherence, and correctness while identifying its limitations and biases. Following this example, this paper assesses the accuracy and authenticity of the information generated by LLM s related to Islamic inheritance law. To this end, I selected the widely available free versions of OpenAI’s ChatGPT-4, Chinese company High-Flyer’s DeepSeek, Google’s Gemini, and Microsoft’s Co-Pilot. To account for the non-deterministic nature of GenAI outputs (where responses vary across users), this study employed a triple- annotator methodology to generate and evaluate response sets, ensuring robust and reliable assessment. We posed five questions concerning Islamic inheritance law, ranging from simple to complex cases. These include: General differences between Sunni and Shia inheritance laws; Simple propositions that do not involve differences between Sunni and Shia schools; Slightly complex propositions on which Sunni and Shia schools differ, such as the inheritance rights of widows and daughters; Moderately complex propositions that require readjustments of legal heirs after applying the general rules of Islamic inheritance law; and Very complex propositions on which state-enforced laws in Muslim- majority states differ from classical Islamic inheritance law and have been subjected to multiple judicial interpretations. The AI models’ responses are evaluated using the GenAI Evaluation Scale ( GAIES ). The five parameters for evaluation are as follows: Accuracy: The correctness of the AI -generated responses is measured against established Islamic legal principles. Comprehensiveness: The extent to which the AI models provide thorough and complete answers to the prompts. Explainability: The clarity and reasoning behind the AI -generated responses, including the explanation of how the responses were derived from the primary and secondary sources of Islamic law. Authenticity of References: The authenticity of the sources referenced by the AI models, ensuring that they align with commonly accepted legal texts. Structure of Information: The organization and flow of the legal ruling produced by the AI models, assessing whether the ruling is presented logically and coherently. Each AI model’s performance is scored based on these five parameters, and the results are compared to determine which model provides the most accurate and authentic legal rulings. Each parameter carries a maximum of 4 marks, and each proposition carries a maximum of 20 marks. As each AI model is prompted to respond to 5 questions, the maximum marks that each model could score are 100 (20 multiplied by 5). To systematically assess the quality of GenAI outputs in Islamic inheritance law, we developed a scoring framework that recognizes and differentiates key dimensions of output reliability. The framework awards higher scores to responses that demonstrate legal accuracy, correct citation of primary and secondary sources, sound juristic reasoning, completeness, and clear structure. This approach highlights the strengths of GenAI models while also identifying the areas of improvement while distinguishing whether challenges arise from gaps in legal knowledge, reasoning limitations, reference inconsistencies, or fabrications. 3 Results and Discussion Question 1: Differences between Sunni and Shia schools in Inheritance Law One of the most important distinctions between Sunni and Shia inheritance law is that Shia law is generally more gender-sensitive than Sunni law (Cheema 2012). While Sunni law gives preference to agnates (relatives through the male line), Shia law prioritizes the nearest relative, whether agnate or cognate. This difference has significant implications for determining the shares of legal heirs. For example, if a deceased person leaves behind only a daughter and no son, Sunni law grants the daughter half of the inheritance, with the remaining half going to the deceased’s agnatic relatives. In contrast, Shia law awards the daughter the entire estate in the absence of a son (Carroll 1995). Several other important differences between Sunni and Shia inheritance laws include: Both Sunni and Shia law recognize two main categories of legal heirs: Sharers (also called Qurʾanic heirs, as their shares are prescribed in the Qurʾan) and Residuaries. Sunni law recognizes thirteen Sharers, but Shia law identifies only nine Sharers and excludes grandparents and the son’s daughter from Sharers. Shia law does not acknowledge a third category of legal heirs known as Distant Kindred. Shia law divides heirs into three main classes, alongside the categories of Sharers and Residuaries. Unlike Sunni law, Shia law does not apply the rule of increase ( aūl ), which adjusts shares among heirs in specific circumstances. 3 Shia law applies the principle of representation for distributing inheritance among distant relatives. Under Shia law, a widow does not inherit land. Instead, she only receives a share in movable property, including the value of any buildings on the land. 4 We posed the following question to AI models: “You are an expert in Islamic law, please provide an answer to this question: What are the differences between Sunni and Shia schools regarding Islamic inheritance law?” Gemini listed six key differences between Sunni and Shia inheritance laws. While the answer correctly highlighted some key differences, including the role of the Imam (spiritual leader), the doctrine of return ( radd ), the inheritance of females, and the inheritance of distant relatives, it contained several incorrect statements. For example, Gemini stated, “Shia law generally gives females equal shares to males, but there are some exceptions based on specific circumstances.” This is incorrect even though Shia law favorably treats females; it does not give them “equal shares.” Similarly, Gemini’s statement that “Sunni law gives parents a fixed share of the inheritance, regardless of whether the deceased had children or not” is incorrect. Parents receive a 1/6 share if there are children of the deceased, and the mother receives 1/3 if there are no children. In the absence of surviving children, the father’s inheritance share varies: he receives either (a) the residual two-thirds (after the mother’s mandatory one-third share) when the mother survives, or (b) the entire estate if the mother has predeceased. Like Gemini, DeepSeek listed six key differences and provided several incorrect statements. For instance, it incorrectly stated, “Sons and daughters inherit equally in some cases”. Similarly, it wrongly stated that illegitimate children “may inherit from their mother” under Shia law. 5 In contrast, the Co-pilot highlighted only three differences between Sunni and Shia inheritance laws. On women’s right to inheritance, it correctly stated: “Similar to Sunni law, women receive a fixed share, but the distribution can be more equitable depending on the circumstances.” Co-Pilot produced only one incorrect statement, “Shia law allows for descendants of predeceased heirs to inherit in their place, which is not always the case in Sunni law.” This is an inaccurate description of the rule of representation under Islamic inheritance law. The accuracy scores of Gemini and DeepSeek were 2/4, while Co-Pilot scored 3/4. Both Gemini and DeepSeek scored better on comprehensiveness: 3/4 they highlighted six differences against three by Co-Pilot, which scored 2/4 on this parameter. Gemini and DeepSeek also scored better on explainability, 3/4 against Co-Pilot’s 2/4. Co-Pilot produced a few vague statements, such as “While Shia law also follows the Quranic shares, there is more flexibility in distributing the estate among heirs.” There is no explanation of what “flexibility” means in this context. Initially, Gemini did not provide any references. When prompted to provide references on which its answer was based, it stated, “As an AI language model, I cannot provide specific citations for the information I provide.” Nonetheless, it listed three books and three websites. The books included Islamic Law and Contemporary Legal Issues by Tahir Mahmood, Introduction to Islamic Law by Norman Calder, and Shia Law by Muhammad Jawad Maghniyyah. While all three authors have written on Islamic law, the titles of all three books are fabricated. However, the web addresses of the three websites https://www.al-islam.org/ , https://islamqa.info/en , and https://www.islamicfinder.org/ were correct. In contrast, Co-Pilot cited two online research papers available at ijirl.com and iri.aiou.edu.pk on the differences between Sunni and Shia inheritance laws, and referred to the exact page numbers in Fyzee’s book, Outlines of Mohammadan Law , which was cited in one of the papers (Budhiraja 2022). As Co-Pilot’s references were authentic and verifiable, it scored full marks 4/4 on the Authenticity of References parameter. Gemini, DeepSeek, and Co-Pilot produced well-structured answers with short introductions and conclusions and a main body comprising several headings. In the overall score on the first question, Co-Pilot performed relatively better than Gemini, scoring 15/20 against 13/20. DeepSeek performed better than both, scoring 16/20. The answer provided by ChatGPT-4 was the most comprehensive. It identified eight differences and summarized the key differences in the following table: View Full Size Table 1 Differences between Sunni and Shia Inheritance Law Citation: Journal of Digital Islamicate Research 3, 1 (2025) ; 10.1163/27732363-20250002 Download Figure Download figure as PowerPoint slide While most of the information was accurate, comprehensive, and sufficiently explained, there was an incorrect statement regarding bequests. After describing the Sunni law of bequests, it stated, “Similarly, a person can only make a bequest for up to one-third of their estate. However, Shia law is generally stricter about invalidating any bequest that contradicts the rights of heirs.” This statement is both incorrect and ambiguous. It is wrong because, unlike Sunni law, Shia law allows bequest in favor of legal heirs (Abbasi and Cheema 2024, 283). The second sentence does not clarify how Shia law is “stricter” in invalidating “any bequest that contradicts the rights of heirs.” If the implication is that Shia law strictly disallows bequests in favor of legal heirs, then it is patently wrong. ChatGPT-4 also provided a comprehensive list of primary and secondary sources of Islamic inheritance law, including the classic textbooks such as Al-Hidayah (The Guidance) by Burhan al-Din al-Marghinani (Hanafi School) and Bidayat al-Mujtahid by Ibn Rushd (Comparative Sunni Jurisprudence) on Sunni law; and Sharh al-Lumʾah (The Radiance of Faith) by al-Shahid al-Thani (Jaʾfari School) and Islamic Laws by Ayatollah Abul-Qasim al-Khoei on Shia law. Other references included The Islamic Law of Inheritance by Hamid Khan (Oxford University Press, 2007). While all these references are authentic, one reference, “ Islamic Inheritance Law in Shia and Sunni Jurisprudence by Sayyid Muhammad Rizvi,” was fabricated. Although the author has written several books on Islamic law, he has not authored a book with this title. DeepSeek also generated a comprehensive list of references, which included leading textbooks of both Sunni and Shia schools, such as Al-Muwatta by Imam Malik, Al-Hidayah by Burhan al-Din al-Marghinani, Al-Umm by Imam Shafiʾi, Al-Mughni by Ibn Qudamah, and Jawahir al-Kalam by Muhammad Hasan al-Najafi. Unlike ChatGPT-4, DeepSeek did not fabricate any references. Overall, ChatGPT-4 scored the highest. The scores are shown in the following table: View Full Size Table 2 Citation: Journal of Digital Islamicate Research 3, 1 (2025) ; 10.1163/27732363-20250002 Download Figure Download figure as PowerPoint slide Question 2: Simple propositions that do not involve differences between Sunni and Shia laws Despite the above-mentioned differences, Sunni and Shia inheritance laws share several similarities, as the primary sources of both Sunni and Shia schools are the same – the Qurʾan and Sunnah (traditions of the Prophet Muhammad). The differences arise due to plural interpretations of these sources by Muslim jurists. To assess the information generated by AI models, I posed the following simple question: You are an expert in Islamic law, please provide an answer to this question: Please calculate the share in inheritance if a deceased person leaves behind a husband and a son under Sunni and Shia inheritance laws. Unsurprisingly, all four AI models (ChatGPT-4, DeepSeek, Gemini, and Co-Pilot) correctly stated the shares of the husband and son as 1/4 and 3/4, respectively. ChatGPT-4 provided the most comprehensive answer by identifying the relevant verse of the Qurʾan (Surah An-Nisa, 4:12) and cited the books as mentioned in the answer to the first question discussed above, including the fabricated reference to “ Islamic Inheritance Law in Shia and Sunni Jurisprudence by Sayyid Muhammad Rizvi.” Co-Pilot cited several sources, including a paper referred to in its answer to the first question. Most interestingly, it cited two online inheritance calculators: http://inheritancecalculator.net/ and https://almwareeth.com/islamic-inheritance-calculator , but did not identify the relevant verses of the Qurʾan or cite any book on Islamic inheritance law. Gemini did not provide any references for the information it generated. DeepSeek cited a verse of the Qurʾan (Surah An-Nisa, 4:12) along with Al-Hidayah, Al-Mughni, Jawahir al-Kalam , and Al-Masalik . The table below summarizes the scores of each GenAI model. View Full Size Table 3 Citation: Journal of Digital Islamicate Research 3, 1 (2025) ; 10.1163/27732363-20250002 Download Figure Download figure as PowerPoint slide Question 3: Slightly complex propositions on which Sunni and Shia schools differ, such as the inheritance rights of widows and daughters We posed the question: “You are an expert in Islamic law, please provide an answer to this question: Please calculate shares in inheritance if a deceased person leaves behind a wife, a daughter, and a brother under Sunni and Shia inheritance laws. Please provide references to your answer.” The four AI models provided partly accurate answers to this question. ChatGPT-4 and DeepSeek performed relatively better by correctly identifying the shares of each legal heir and highlighting the difference between Sunni and Shia inheritance laws, but both failed to specify that a widow under Shia law does not inherit the land (Abbasi 2024). ChatGPT succinctly summarized the key differences in the following table: View Full Size Table 4 Citation: Journal of Digital Islamicate Research 3, 1 (2025) ; 10.1163/27732363-20250002 Download Figure Download figure as PowerPoint slide ChatGPT-4 cited the relevant Qurʾanic verses and referred to the same books as mentioned in the previous two questions. DeepSeek cited Al-Muwatta by Imam Malik (Sunni) and Jawahir al-Kalam by Sheikh Muhammad Hasan al-Najafi (Shia). Co-Pilot correctly identified the shares under Sunni law but failed to do so under Shia law, which excludes brother(s) in the presence of daughter(s). Co-Pilot incorrectly allocated 3/8 of the share to the brother after allocating 1/8 to the wife and 1/4 to the daughter under Shia law. It did not explain why these shares were allocated to each legal heir. In references, it cited a few references, such as Lucy Carrol’s paper on Sunni law (Carrol 1983), but it did not cite any reference to Shia inheritance law. Gemini could not correctly identify the shares of each legal heir under both Sunni and Shia schools. It incorrectly stated the shares as follows: Sunni : Wife: 1/4; Daughter: 1/8; Brother: 3/8 Shia : Wife: 1/4; Daughter: 1/4; Brother: 1/2 A wife inherits 1/8 of the estate in the presence of a child (or children) and 1/4 when there are no children of the deceased. The daughter receives a 1/4 share if she is the only child. The shares of both the wife and daughter are prescribed in the Qurʾan in Surah An-Nisa (4:11–12). Under Sunni law, the brother receives the remaining share after the wife and daughter receive their prescribed shares. However, under Shia law, the brother does not receive any share in the presence of a daughter. Generally, all four AI models generated well-structured responses to this question. Below are the scores: View Full Size Table 5 Citation: Journal of Digital Islamicate Research 3, 1 (2025) ; 10.1163/27732363-20250002 Download Figure Download figure as PowerPoint slide Question 4: Moderately complex propositions that require readjustments of legal heirs after applying the general rules of Islamic inheritance law While the rules of Islamic inheritance law could be applied with mathematical precision, their strict application sometimes leads to unusual outcomes in exceptional circumstances. One such situation arises where uterine brothers receive a share, but full brothers are excluded because they are classified as residuaries, and in this particular situation, nothing remains for them to inherit. This scenario did not occur during the lifetime of the Prophet Muhammad, but it later came before the second Caliph, Umar bin Khattab. The full brothers who did not receive any share in inheritance approached Umar and argued: “Even if our father were a donkey ( ḥimār ) – a derogatory term implying uselessness – do we not still share the same mother as the deceased?” Umar accepted their reasoning and ruled that uterine and full brothers would share one-third of the estate. This decision by Umar is recognized by two Sunni schools, Mālikī and Shāfiʿī, but it is not accepted by the Ḥanafī and Ḥanbalī schools (Coulson 1971, 73–76). ChatGPT-4, Co-Pilot, and DeepSeek responded to this proposition according to the Ḥanafī and Ḥanbalī schools, while Gemini did not specify the shares of each legal heir. When prompted to revise their answer according to the Mālikī and Shafiʿi schools, ChatGPT-4 and DeepSeek still produced the same answers, despite citing the references to the authoritative books of both schools. On the Mālikī school, ChatGPT-4 provided a reference with exact page numbers of the authoritative book, Bidayat al-Mujtahid by Ibn Rushd in Volume 2, pages 307–330, along with the online link: Archive.org Bidayat al-Mujtahid. While the volume number is correct, the page numbers are incorrect. The exact page number on which this issue is discussed in this book is 419. DeepSeek provided a detailed list of classical textbooks of the Mālikī and Shāfiʿī schools, along with references to contemporary scholars, which included The Islamic Law of Inheritance by Dr. Hussain Hamid Hassan. However, this citation is fabricated, as the correct author of this title is Hamid Khan (Khan 2007). Gemini did not specify the shares of each legal heir on this question. Instead, it generated general statements such as “A common rule in Islamic inheritance law is that the husband is entitled to a fixed share, often 1/4 of the inheritance. The remaining portion is then divided among the parents and siblings. The siblings’ shares are typically determined based on their relationship to the deceased.” It did not provide any references either. As a result, its overall score is 0. The table below summarizes the overall scores of all three AI models: View Full Size Table 6 Citation: Journal of Digital Islamicate Research 3, 1 (2025) ; 10.1163/27732363-20250002 Download Figure Download figure as PowerPoint slide Question 5: Very complex propositions on which state-enforced laws in Muslim-majority states differ from classical Islamic inheritance law and have been subjected to judicial interpretation. I posed the following question to test the jurisdiction-specific legal information generated by AI models: Please calculate the share in inheritance if a deceased is survived by a son, and a deceased son’s daughter under Islamic inheritance law as applied in Iran, Pakistan, and Egypt. All four AI models failed to produce an accurate answer to this question. Notably, ChatGPT-4 provided the correct references to the relevant statute in Pakistan, the Muslim Family Laws Ordinance 1961, but failed to apply it accurately. It cited the wrong statute in Egypt, Law No. 77 of 1943, instead of the correct statute, Law No. 71 of 1946, also known as the compulsory bequest ( wasiyyat wajibah ), which grants orphaned grandchildren a share in the inheritance, up to one-third of the estate. 6 Interestingly, DeepSeek also cited the same wrong statute. It also reproduced the fabricated reference to a book on Islamic inheritance law as mentioned in the previous question. ChatGPT-4 generated the following table to summarize the inheritance shares: View Full Size Table 7 Citation: Journal of Digital Islamicate Research 3, 1 (2025) ; 10.1163/27732363-20250002 Download Figure Download figure as PowerPoint slide Under Shia law, as applied in Iran, a son’s daughter is excluded in the presence of a son, based on the rule that a nearer relative excludes remote relatives. In both Pakistan and Egypt, the legislatures reformed the classical rules of the Ḥanafī school to grant orphaned grandchildren a share in inheritance, but they adopted two different legal solutions. In Pakistan, the Muslim Family Laws Ordinance 1961 grants orphaned grandchildren the right of representation to inherit the share their parents would have received. 7 In contrast, Egyptian law provides that orphaned grandchildren are entitled to the share their parents would have received had they survived the propositus, but only up to a maximum of one-third of the estate (Fatima 2024; Cheema 2024, 2023). Co-Pilot incorrectly stated that in Iran, the son would receive two-thirds of the estate, and in Pakistan, the son would receive double the share of the granddaughter. However, it correctly specified the share of the granddaughter as 1/3 under Egyptian law. In references, it cited an article in Wikipedia on Islamic inheritance law and Hamid Khan’s book, The Islamic Law of Inheritance (Oxford University Press 2007). Co-Pilot did not explain how the shares were calculated. Its answer, however, was well structured. Therefore, while it received 0 marks on the Explainability parameter, it scored full marks 4/4 on the Structure of Information. Gemini generated a completely inaccurate answer by stating that in Iran, “the daughter would typically inherit an equal share to that of her father,” and in Pakistan and Egypt, “the daughter would typically inherit half the share of her father.” It did not identify the legal sources on which this information was based. Therefore, its overall score is 0. The overall score of each GenAI model on this question is as follows: View Full Size Table 8 Citation: Journal of Digital Islamicate Research 3, 1 (2025) ; 10.1163/27732363-20250002 Download Figure Download figure as PowerPoint slide 3.1 Overall Scores of ChatGPT-4, DeepSeek, Co-Pilot, and Gemini View Full Size Table 9 ChatGPT-4 Citation: Journal of Digital Islamicate Research 3, 1 (2025) ; 10.1163/27732363-20250002 Download Figure Download figure as PowerPoint slide View Full Size Table 10 DeepSeek Citation: Journal of Digital Islamicate Research 3, 1 (2025) ; 10.1163/27732363-20250002 Download Figure Download figure as PowerPoint slide View Full Size Table 11 Co-Pilot Citation: Journal of Digital Islamicate Research 3, 1 (2025) ; 10.1163/27732363-20250002 Download Figure Download figure as PowerPoint slide View Full Size Table 12 Gemini Citation: Journal of Digital Islamicate Research 3, 1 (2025) ; 10.1163/27732363-20250002 Download Figure Download figure as PowerPoint slide 3.2 Overall Scores of GenAI Models View Full Size Table 13 Citation: Journal of Digital Islamicate Research 3, 1 (2025) ; 10.1163/27732363-20250002 Download Figure Download figure as PowerPoint slide The chart below presents this data: View Full Size Chart 1 Comparison of GenAI models on various evaluation metrics Citation: Journal of Digital Islamicate Research 3, 1 (2025) ; 10.1163/27732363-20250002 Download Figure Download figure as PowerPoint slide Based on the analysis of the above results, we draw three main conclusions: ChatGPT-4 scored an overall 80.5% on the GenAI Evaluation Scale ( GAIES ), followed by a 77.5% score of DeepSeek. These scores are substantially higher than the medium score of Co-Pilot’s 61.5%, and the poor score of Gemini, which is only 35.5%. A cascading effect is evident across the spectrum from simple to complex propositions, as all four AI models scored relatively higher on simple propositions and lower on complex ones. Notably, all four AI models scored the lowest marks on the final proposition, which was the most complex and advanced, as it required jurisdiction-specific application of the rules of Islamic inheritance law. On the five parameters of the GenAI Evaluation Scale ( GAIES ), all four AI models scored the highest on the Structure of Information, Authenticity of References, and Comprehensiveness. Their scores were medium on the Explainability parameter. However, the overall score of each GenAI model on accuracy was minimal: only 32% by Gemini (6.5/20), 60% by DeepSeek and Co-Pilot (12/20), and 67.5% by ChatGPT-4 (13.5/20). Given the consistently low accuracy scores of all four AI models, significant concerns arise regarding the reliability of AI -generated content on Islamic inheritance law. The following section investigates the potential of Google’s NotebookLM to mitigate these challenges. 4 How Can GenAI Models Be Utilized for Islamic Legal Education and Scholarship? Google’s NotebookLM allows users to upload documents and generate answers with exact page references. We tested it by uploading Succession in the Muslim Family by Coulson (1971) and posed five questions, as outlined above and reproduced below in Appendix 1. It produced significantly more detailed responses than any of the four GenAI models previously discussed. For the first question, it identified thirteen differences between Sunni and Shia inheritance laws, compared to eight by ChatGPT, six by Gemini and DeepSeek, and only three by Co-Pilot. NotebookLM also provided more comprehensive answers to the second and third questions, which concerned the inheritance shares of a son and a husband, and of a wife, daughter, and brother under both Sunni and Shia laws. Most notably, while all four GenAI models failed to properly apply state- enforced reformed inheritance laws concerning orphaned grandchildren’s inheritance rights, NotebookLM correctly applied the statutory laws of Pakistan and Egypt. Even more impressive was NotebookLM’s 100% accuracy rate, all answers were directly sourced from the uploaded book and could be verified through the cited page references. This approach effectively addresses the hallucination problems that plague other GenAI models. However, NotebookLM has limitations (Yeo et al. 2025), particularly in terms of comprehensiveness. For instance, it failed to specify that under Shia law, a childless widow does not inherit land, despite Coulson’s discussion of this principle on pages 113–114. Similarly, in a scenario involving the inheritance rights of uterine brothers alongside full brothers, a husband, and a mother, it did not clarify that the Mālikī and Shāfiʿī schools allocate one-third of the estate to the uterine brothers. Coulson covers this issue in detail under the Himariyya ( Mushtaraka ) Rule on pages 73–76, but NotebookLM only provided this information when specifically prompted to address the issue under the Mālikī school. Based on the results arising out of the application of the GenAI Evaluation Scale ( GAIES ) to the information generated by multiple GenAI models, we propose the GenAI Application Scale ( GAIAS ) for students, teachers, scholars, and practitioners to effectively use AI models for generating information regarding Islamic inheritance law. We draw insights from the state-of-the-art literature on the integration of generative AI into legal education (Perkins 2024; Furze 2023 and 2024; Kılınç 2024), as well as our experience of learning, teaching, and researching Islamic inheritance law for several decades at multiple law schools across several jurisdictions. The GenAI Application Scale ( GAIAS ) is proposed as a general standard for integrating GenAI into Islamic legal education and scholarship. While its focus is specific to Islamic inheritance law, it has the potential to extend to other areas of Islamic law. The Scale provides general guidelines for using GenAI models for learning, teaching, researching, and applying the rules of Islamic inheritance law by underscoring their utility while identifying the potential risks of such use. 1. Full Use of GenAI as Research Assistant Our evaluation of AI -generated information shows that AI models facilitate the generation of structured and comprehensive information and provide references to primary and secondary sources of Islamic law. All three models scored the highest on the Structure of Information parameter, with ChatGPT-4 and DeepSeek scoring 100%, Co-Pilot 95% (19/20), and Gemini 60% (12/20). However, all references need to be verified, as the score on the Authenticity of References parameter was low: only 5% for Gemini (1/20), 67.5% for Co-Pilot (13.5/20), and relatively better 77.5% for ChatGPT-4 (15.5/20), and 85% DeepSeek (17/20). 2. Partial Use of GenAI Subject to Human Evaluation At this level, GenAI could be used to develop basic understanding of the structure of the legal rules of Islamic inheritance law, e.g., the categories and classes of legal heirs but still subject to human evaluation and supervision as all four GenAI models tend to present relevant information in a confident and convincing tone supported by fabricated references which appear authentic (Wachter et al. 2024). For instance, in response to question number 5 above, ChatGPT-4 incorrectly stated that orphaned grandchildren do not inherit in the presence of a son of the deceased (their paternal uncle), despite citing the correct statute, the Muslim Family Laws Ordinance 1961, applicable in Pakistan. Similarly, it wrongly stated that orphaned grandchildren do not inherit under Egyptian law in the presence of their uncle and provided an incorrect citation to Law No. 77 of 1943 instead of the correct statute, Law No. 71 of 1946, which grants orphaned grandchildren a share in the inheritance, up to one-third of the estate. 3. Minimal Use of GenAI In their current state, GenAI models lack the capacity to provide correct answers related to legal issues on Islamic inheritance law, particularly where there are subtle differences between various schools of Sunni and Shia jurisprudence. The evaluation of the AI -generated information revealed that, despite citing the correct sources, which state the different rules of various schools of Sunni jurisprudence, AI models failed to provide accurate information. For instance, in its response to question 4 above, ChatGPT-4 cited the translation of the authoritative textbook, Bidāyat al-Mujtāhid (Jurist’s Primer) by Ibn Rushd, which describes the different rules of Islamic inheritance law as elaborated by the jurists of various Sunni schools, but still failed to provide the correct information. 4. No Use of GenAI We found that all four GenAI models could not choose the preferred opinion amongst multiple juristic views or identify the binding legal authority where there were multiple judgments regarding the interpretation of particular statutes. Although large language models are advanced artificial intelligence systems trained on vast amounts of text data to generate human-like text, they lack the capacity to make judgments as humans do (Murray 2024). 8 As a result, in the above five questions, none of the GenAI models could identify the preferred juristic view on the contentious areas of Islamic inheritance law, e.g., inheritance rights of uterine brothers and full brothers. 5. Ban on GenAI Use GenAI must not be used to generate information that is unethical or illegal. For instance, it must not be used to fabricate sources that resemble the primary sources of Islamic law, the Qurʾan and Sunnah (sayings and traditions of the Prophet Muhammad). When I asked ChatGPT-4 to advise on how to disinherit daughters and their children under Islamic inheritance law, it identified the legal mechanisms such as gifts ( hibah ), wills, and voluntary relinquishment of shares by daughters and their children. Still, it stated, “While Sharia provides clear guidelines that daughters must receive a share of the inheritance, there are some permissible methods (like hibah [gifts]) that may allow for some adjustments during one’s lifetime. However, it is critical to ensure that such actions do not violate Islamic law’s ethical and legal framework.” This response demonstrates that GenAI models have some built-in safeguards against unethical use of the information that they generate. Still, caution must be exercised to ensure that the rights and interests of the legal heirs under Islamic inheritance law are not compromised due to AI -generated information. View Full Size GenAI Application Scale ( GAIAS ) Citation: Journal of Digital Islamicate Research 3, 1 (2025) ; 10.1163/27732363-20250002 Download Figure Download figure as PowerPoint slide The above Scale is developed to facilitate the integration of GenAI into Islamic legal education, research, and practice. A review of literature on the use of GenAI in higher education reveals positive outcomes from integrating GenAI models, including ChatGPT-4, as an aid in teaching and learning (Bliss 2024; İpek 2023; Ajevski 2023; Rawas 2024). Empirical research indicates that personalized chatbot interactions can foster critical thinking, promote active learning, enhance student engagement, and add innovation to pedagogical techniques in education (Chong-Lem 2024; Tlili et al. 2023; Dai et al. 2023; Memarian and Doleck 2023). Simultaneously, concerns have been raised regarding potential overreliance on GenAI models, the production of misinformation, the lack of trustworthiness of AI -generated information, and the erosion of academic rigor (Giannakos 2024; Cotton et al. 2024; Mogavi 2024; Eke 2023). 5 Conclusion The findings of this study underscore the potential of GenAI models like ChatGPT-4, DeepSeek, and NotebookLM to transform Islamic legal education and scholarship, particularly in the domain of inheritance law. These tools can significantly enhance students’ learning experience and reduce the time required for conducting legal research by synthesizing information and offering clear, structured responses to complex legal queries. However, their current limitations, particularly regarding the accurate citation of sources, understanding of state-specific statutory laws, and susceptibility to generating false information, highlight the necessity for human oversight. While GenAI models offer substantial support to Islamic law students and scholars by aiding in interpreting intricate jurisprudential texts and facilitating the comparison of diverse schools of thought, they are not yet equipped to replace traditional scholars. The authority of Islamic law teachers, experts, and jurists remains grounded in attributes such as piety, dedication to the pursuit of truth, and intellectual rigor – qualities that GenAI models cannot replicate. The complexity and diversity of Islamic jurisprudence, particularly in inheritance matters, require nuanced understanding and meticulous reasoning that GenAI models are not yet capable of replicating. Although GenAI models like ChatGPT-4 have made notable progress in mastering aspects of Islamic inheritance law, the GenAI Evaluation Scale ( GAIES ) used in this study reveals that significant improvements are still required, particularly in terms of accuracy, source validation, and adaptation to local legal reforms. Until these issues are addressed, GenAI should be viewed as a supplementary tool that enhances and augments, rather than replaces, the expertise of human scholars and jurists in Islamic law (Ghaly 2023). This study introduces the GenAI Application Scale ( GAIAS ) to guide the effective and efficient use of AI models in Islamic legal education, learning, and research. The objective of this Scale is to serve as a guide for students, teachers, practitioners, and scholars of Islamic inheritance law to make the best use of GenAI models without falling into the trap of falsified information, which is presented in a confident and authoritative tone. Acknowledgement I am grateful to Prof. Dr. Shahbaz Ahmad Cheema for his valuable comments on earlier drafts of this paper. I would also like to thank Simra Sohail, Faisal Sattar, and Adeel Hassan for their excellent research assistance. Appendix 1: Prompts You are an expert in Islamic law, please provide an answer to this question: 9 What are the differences between Sunni and Shia schools regarding Islamic inheritance law? Please provide references to your answer. You are an expert in Islamic law, please provide an answer to this question: Please calculate shares in inheritance if a deceased person leaves behind a husband and a son under Sunni and Shia inheritance laws. Please provide references to your answer. You are an expert in Islamic law, please provide an answer to this question: Please calculate shares in inheritance if a deceased person leaves behind a wife, a daughter, and a brother under Sunni and Shia inheritance laws. Please provide references to your answer. You are an expert in Islamic law, please provide an answer to this question: Please calculate shares in inheritance if a deceased leaves behind a husband, a mother, two uterine brothers, and two full brothers. Please provide references to your answer. You are an expert in Islamic law, please provide an answer to this question: Please calculate shares in inheritance if a deceased is survived by a son, and a deceased son’s daughter under Islamic inheritance law as applied in Iran, Pakistan, and Egypt. Please provide references to your answer. Bibliography Abbasi , M. Z. 2024 . “ Fluidity of Sharīʾa and the Modern State: Inheritance Rights of Childless Widows under Shīʿa Personal Law in British India and Pakistan .” Yearbook of Islamic and Middle Eastern Law 23 ( 1 ): 233 – 263 . Abbasi , M. Z. 2024 . “ Fluidity of Sharīʾa and the Modern State: Inheritance Rights of Childless Widows under Shīʿa Personal Law in British India and Pakistan .” Yearbook of Islamic and Middle Eastern Law 23 ( 1 ): 233 – 263 . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Abbasi , M. Z. and Cheema , S. A. 2024 . Family Laws in Pakistan . Karachi : Oxford University Press . Abbasi , M. Z. and Cheema , S. A. 2024 . Family Laws in Pakistan. Karachi : Oxford University Press . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Ajevski , Marjan , Kim Barker , Andrew Gilbert , Liz Hardie , and Francine Ryan . 2023 . “ ChatGPT and the Future of Legal Education and Practice .” The Law Teacher 57 ( 3 ): 352 – 364 . Ajevski , Marjan , Kim Barker , Andrew Gilbert , Liz Hardie , and Francine Ryan . 2023 . “ ChatGPT and the Future of Legal Education and Practice .” The Law Teacher 57 ( 3 ): 352 – 364 . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Al-Khoei , Ayatollah Abul-Qasim . 1999 . Islamic Laws . Qom : Ansariyan Publications . Al-Khoei , Ayatollah Abul-Qasim . 1999 . Islamic Laws. Qom : Ansariyan Publications . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Al-Marghinani , Burhan al-Din . 1957 . Al-Hidayah (The Guidance) , translated by Charles Hamilton . Lahore : Premier Book House . Al-Marghinani , Burhan al-Din . 1957 . Al-Hidayah (The Guidance), translated by Charles Hamilton . Lahore : Premier Book House . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Al-Shahid al-Thani . 1994 . Sharh al-Lumʾah (The Radiance of Faith) . Beirut : Dar al-Kutub al-Ilmiyya . Al-Shahid al-Thani . 1994 . Sharh al-Lumʾah (The Radiance of Faith). Beirut : Dar al-Kutub al-Ilmiyya . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Bhojani , Ali-Reza , and Marcus Schwarting . 2023 . “ Truth and regret: Large language models, the Qurʾan, and misinformation .” Theology and Science 21 ( 4 ): 557 – 563 . Bhojani , Ali-Reza , and Marcus Schwarting . 2023 . “ Truth and regret: Large language models, the Qurʾan, and misinformation .” Theology and Science 21 ( 4 ): 557 – 563 . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Bliss , John . 2024 . “ Teaching Law in the Age of Generative AI .” Jurimetrics 64 ( 2 ): 111 – 161 . Bliss , John . 2024 . “ Teaching Law in the Age of Generative AI .” Jurimetrics 64 ( 2 ): 111 – 161 . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Bubeck , S. , Chandrasekaran , V. , Eldan , R. , Gehrke , J. , Horvitz , E. , Kamar , E. , Lee , P. , Lee , Y. T. , Li , Y. , Lundberg , S. , Nori , H. , Palangi , H. , Ribeiro , M. T. , and Zhang , Y. 2023 . “ Sparks of Artificial General Intelligence: Early experiments with GPT-4 .” ArXiv . https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.12712 ( accessed 30 May 2025 ). Bubeck , S. , Chandrasekaran , V. , Eldan , R. , Gehrke , J. , Horvitz , E. , Kamar , E. , Lee , P. , Lee , Y. T. , Li , Y. , Lundberg , S. , Nori , H. , Palangi , H. , Ribeiro , M. T. , and Zhang , Y. 2023 . “ Sparks of Artificial General Intelligence: Early experiments with GPT-4 .” ArXiv. https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.12712 ( accessed 30 May 2025 ). )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Budhiraja , Gurneet Singh . 2022 . “ Inheritance under Shia Law: Principles and its Analysis .” Indian Journal of Integrated Research in Law 3 ( 1 ): 1 – 10 . Budhiraja , Gurneet Singh . 2022 . “ Inheritance under Shia Law: Principles and its Analysis .” Indian Journal of Integrated Research in Law 3 ( 1 ): 1 – 10 . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Calder , Norman . 2010 . Introduction to Islamic Law . Edinburgh : Edinburgh University Press . Calder , Norman . 2010 . Introduction to Islamic Law. Edinburgh : Edinburgh University Press . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Carroll , Lucy . 1983 . “ The Hanafi Law of Intestate Succession: A Simplified Approach .” Modern Asian Studies 17 ( 4 ): 629 – 670 . Carroll , Lucy . 1983 . “ The Hanafi Law of Intestate Succession: A Simplified Approach .” Modern Asian Studies 17 ( 4 ): 629 – 670 . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Carroll , Lucy . 1995 . “ Application of the Islamic Law of Succession: Was the Propositus a Sunnī or a Shī˓ī? .” Islamic Law and Society : 24 – 42 . Carroll , Lucy . 1995 . “ Application of the Islamic Law of Succession: Was the Propositus a Sunnī or a Shī˓ī? .” Islamic Law and Society: 24 – 42 . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Chaudhary , Yaqub . 2024 . “ Islam and artificial intelligence .” The Cambridge Companion to Religion and Artificial Intelligence . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . 109 – 130 . Chaudhary , Yaqub . 2024 . “ Islam and artificial intelligence .” The Cambridge Companion to Religion and Artificial Intelligence. Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . 109 – 130 . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Cheema , S. A. 2012 . “ Shia and Sunni Laws of Inheritance: A Comparative Analysis .” Pakistan Journal of Islamic Research 10 : 69 – 82 . Cheema , S. A. 2012 . “ Shia and Sunni Laws of Inheritance: A Comparative Analysis .” Pakistan Journal of Islamic Research 10 : 69 – 82 . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Cheema , S. A. 2021 . “ Distribution of inheritance under Islamic law: An appraisal of online inheritance calculators .” Journal of Islamic Thought and Civilization 11 ( 1 ): 112 – 131 . Cheema , S. A. 2021 . “ Distribution of inheritance under Islamic law: An appraisal of online inheritance calculators .” Journal of Islamic Thought and Civilization 11 ( 1 ): 112 – 131 . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Cheema , S. A. 2023 . “ Section 4 of Pakistan’s Muslim Family Laws Ordinance, 1961: An Exploration of Interpretive Tensions .” Manchester Journal of Transnational Islamic Law &amp; Practice 19 ( 2 ): 2 – 19 . Cheema , S. A. 2023 . “ Section 4 of Pakistan’s Muslim Family Laws Ordinance, 1961: An Exploration of Interpretive Tensions .” Manchester Journal of Transnational Islamic Law &amp; Practice 19 ( 2 ): 2 – 19 . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Cheema , S. A. 2024 . “ Reappraisal of Lucy Carroll’s Tripartite Thesis on Section 4 of Pakistan’s Muslim Family Laws Ordinance 1961 .” Manchester Journal of Transnational Islamic Law &amp; Practice 20 ( 2 ): 1 – 16 . Cheema , S. A. 2024 . “ Reappraisal of Lucy Carroll’s Tripartite Thesis on Section 4 of Pakistan’s Muslim Family Laws Ordinance 1961 .” Manchester Journal of Transnational Islamic Law &amp; Practice 20 ( 2 ): 1 – 16 . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Choi , J. H. and Schwarcz , Daniel . 2025 . “ AI Assistance in Legal Analysis: An Empirical Study .” Journal of Legal Education 73 ( 2 ): 385 – 420 . Choi , J. H. and Schwarcz , Daniel . 2025 . “ AI Assistance in Legal Analysis: An Empirical Study .” Journal of Legal Education 73 ( 2 ): 385 – 420 . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Cong-Lem , N. , Soyoof , A. , and Tsering , D. 2024 . “ A Systematic Review of the Limitations and Associated Opportunities of ChatGPT .” International Journal of Human– Computer Interaction , 41 ( 7 ), 3851 – 3866 . Cong-Lem , N. , Soyoof , A. , and Tsering , D. 2024 . “ A Systematic Review of the Limitations and Associated Opportunities of ChatGPT .” International Journal of Human– Computer Interaction, 41 ( 7 ), 3851 – 3866 . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Cotton , D. R. , P. A. Cotton , and J. R. Shipway . 2024 . “ Chatting and Cheating: Ensuring Academic Integrity in the Era of ChatGPT .” Innovations in Education and Teaching International 61 ( 2 ): 228 – 239 . Cotton , D. R. , P. A. Cotton , and J. R. Shipway . 2024 . “ Chatting and Cheating: Ensuring Academic Integrity in the Era of ChatGPT .” Innovations in Education and Teaching International 61 ( 2 ): 228 – 239 . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Coulson , Noel James . 1971 . Succession in the Muslim Family . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . Coulson , Noel James . 1971 . Succession in the Muslim Family. Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Dai , Yun , Ang Liu , and Cher Ping Lim . 2023 . “ Reconceptualizing ChatGPT and generative AI as a student-driven innovation in higher education .” Procedia CIRP 119 ( 2023 ): 84 – 90 . Dai , Yun , Ang Liu , and Cher Ping Lim . 2023 . “ Reconceptualizing ChatGPT and generative AI as a student-driven innovation in higher education .” Procedia CIRP 119 ( 2023 ): 84 – 90 . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Edwards , Benj . 2025 . Why ChatGPT and Bing Chat are So Good at Making Things Up: A Look Inside the Hallucinating Artificial Minds of the Famous Text Prediction Bots . ars technica , April 6, 2023. 2023, https://arstechnica.com/information-technology/2023/04/why-ai-chatbots-are-the-ultimate-bs-machines-and-how-people-hope-to-fix-them/ ( accessed 1 June 2025 ). Edwards , Benj . 2025 . Why ChatGPT and Bing Chat are So Good at Making Things Up: A Look Inside the Hallucinating Artificial Minds of the Famous Text Prediction Bots . ars technica, April 6, 2023. 2023, https://arstechnica.com/information-technology/2023/04/why-ai-chatbots-are-the-ultimate-bs-machines-and-how-people-hope-to-fix-them/ ( accessed 1 June 2025 ). )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Eke , D. O. 2023 . “ ChatGPT and the Rise of Generative AI : Threat to Academic Integrity? ” Journal of Responsible Technology 13 : 100060 . Eke , D. O. 2023 . “ ChatGPT and the Rise of Generative AI : Threat to Academic Integrity? ” Journal of Responsible Technology 13 : 100060 . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Fatima , Haseeb . 2024 . “ A Critical Appraisal of Obligatory Bequest as Prevalent in Muslim Countries .” Islamic Studies 63 ( 2 ): 213 – 240 . Fatima , Haseeb . 2024 . “ A Critical Appraisal of Obligatory Bequest as Prevalent in Muslim Countries .” Islamic Studies 63 ( 2 ): 213 – 240 . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Furze , Leon , Mike Perkins , Jasper Roe , and Jason MacVaugh . 2024 . “ The AI Assessment Scale ( AIAS ) in action: A pilot implementation of GenAI-supported assessment .” Australasian Journal of Educational Technology 40 ( 4 ): 38 – 55 . Furze , Leon , Mike Perkins , Jasper Roe , and Jason MacVaugh . 2024 . “ The AI Assessment Scale ( AIAS ) in action: A pilot implementation of GenAI-supported assessment .” Australasian Journal of Educational Technology 40 ( 4 ): 38 – 55 . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Fyzee , Asaf A. A. 2008 . Outlines of Muhammadan Law . 5th ed. Oxford : Oxford University Press . Fyzee , Asaf A. A. 2008 . Outlines of Muhammadan Law. 5th ed. Oxford : Oxford University Press . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Ghaly , Mohammed . 2024 . “ What Makes Work ‘Good’ in the Age of Artificial Intelligence ( AI )? Islamic Perspectives on AI -Mediated Work Ethics .” The Journal of Ethics 28 ( 3 ): 429 – 453 . Ghaly , Mohammed . 2024 . “ What Makes Work ‘Good’ in the Age of Artificial Intelligence ( AI )? Islamic Perspectives on AI -Mediated Work Ethics .” The Journal of Ethics 28 ( 3 ): 429 – 453 . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Giannakos , Michail , Roger Azevedo , Peter Brusilovsky , Mutlu Cukurova , Yannis Dimitriadis , Davinia Hernandez-Leo , Sanna Järvelä , Manolis Mavrikis , and Bart Rienties . 2024 . “ The promise and challenges of generative AI in education .” Behaviour &amp; Information Technology : 1 – 27 . Giannakos , Michail , Roger Azevedo , Peter Brusilovsky , Mutlu Cukurova , Yannis Dimitriadis , Davinia Hernandez-Leo , Sanna Järvelä , Manolis Mavrikis , and Bart Rienties . 2024 . “ The promise and challenges of generative AI in education .” Behaviour &amp; Information Technology: 1 – 27 . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Hicks , Michael Townsen , James Humphries , and Joe Slater . 2024 . “ ChatGPT is bullshit .” Ethics and Information Technology 26 ( 2 ): 1 – 10 . Hicks , Michael Townsen , James Humphries , and Joe Slater . 2024 . “ ChatGPT is bullshit .” Ethics and Information Technology 26 ( 2 ): 1 – 10 . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Ibn Rushd . 1996 . Bidayat al-Mujtahid wa Nihayat al-Muqtasid (The Distinguished Jurist’s Primer) . Translated by Imran Ahsan Khan Nyazee . Reading : Garnet Publishing . Ibn Rushd . 1996 . Bidayat al-Mujtahid wa Nihayat al-Muqtasid (The Distinguished Jurist’s Primer). Translated by Imran Ahsan Khan Nyazee . Reading : Garnet Publishing . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation İpek , Ziyaeddin Halid , Ali Ibrahim Can Gözüm , Stamatios Papadakis , and Michail Kallogiannakis . 2023 . “ Educational Applications of the ChatGPT AI System: A Systematic Review Research .” Educational Process: International Journal 12 ( 3 ): 26 – 55 . İpek , Ziyaeddin Halid , Ali Ibrahim Can Gözüm , Stamatios Papadakis , and Michail Kallogiannakis . 2023 . “ Educational Applications of the ChatGPT AI System: A Systematic Review Research .” Educational Process: International Journal 12 ( 3 ): 26 – 55 . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Ji , Ziwei , Nayeon Lee , Rita Frieske , Tiezheng Yu , Dan Su , Yan Xu , Etsuko Ishii , Ye Jin Bang , Andrea Madotto , and Pascale Fung . 2023 . “ Survey of hallucination in natural language generation .” ACM computing surveys 55 ( 12 ): 1 – 38 . Ji , Ziwei , Nayeon Lee , Rita Frieske , Tiezheng Yu , Dan Su , Yan Xu , Etsuko Ishii , Ye Jin Bang , Andrea Madotto , and Pascale Fung . 2023 . “ Survey of hallucination in natural language generation .” ACM computing surveys 55 ( 12 ): 1 – 38 . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Khan , Hamid . 2007 . The Islamic Law of Inheritance . Oxford : Oxford University Press . Khan , Hamid . 2007 . The Islamic Law of Inheritance. Oxford : Oxford University Press . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Kidd , Celeste , and Abeba Birhane . 2023 . “ How AI can distort human beliefs .” Science 380 ( 6651 ): 1222 – 1223 . Kidd , Celeste , and Abeba Birhane . 2023 . “ How AI can distort human beliefs .” Science 380 ( 6651 ): 1222 – 1223 . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Kılınç , Selçuk . 2024 . “ Comprehensive AI assessment framework: Enhancing educational evaluation with ethical AI integration .” Journal of Educational Technology and Online Learning 7 ( 4 ) ICETOL 2024 Special Issue 521 – 540 . Kılınç , Selçuk . 2024 . “ Comprehensive AI assessment framework: Enhancing educational evaluation with ethical AI integration .” Journal of Educational Technology and Online Learning 7 ( 4 ) ICETOL 2024 Special Issue 521 – 540 . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Maghniyyah , Muhammad Jawad . 1997 . Shia Law . Beirut : Dar al-Ilm . Maghniyyah , Muhammad Jawad . 1997 . Shia Law. Beirut : Dar al-Ilm . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Mahmood , Tahir . 1985 . Islamic Law and Contemporary Legal Issues . New Delhi : Indian Law Institute . Mahmood , Tahir . 1985 . Islamic Law and Contemporary Legal Issues. New Delhi : Indian Law Institute . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Malik , Shoaib Ahmed . 2023 . “ Artificial Intelligence and Islamic Thought: Two Distinctive Challenges .” Journal of Islamic and Muslim Studies 8 ( 2 ): 108 – 115 . Malik , Shoaib Ahmed . 2023 . “ Artificial Intelligence and Islamic Thought: Two Distinctive Challenges .” Journal of Islamic and Muslim Studies 8 ( 2 ): 108 – 115 . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Memarian , Bahar , and Tenzin Doleck . 2023 . “ ChatGPT in education: Methods, potentials, and limitations .” Computers in Human Behavior: Artificial Humans 1 ( 2 ): 100022 . Memarian , Bahar , and Tenzin Doleck . 2023 . “ ChatGPT in education: Methods, potentials, and limitations .” Computers in Human Behavior: Artificial Humans 1 ( 2 ): 100022 . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Microsoft Research . March 2023 . “ Sparks of Artificial General Intelligence: Early Experiments with GPT-4 .” arXiv Preprint . https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.12712 . Microsoft Research . March 2023 . “ Sparks of Artificial General Intelligence: Early Experiments with GPT-4 .” arXiv Preprint. https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.12712 . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Mogavi , Reza Hadi , Chao Deng , Justin Juho Kim , Pengyuan Zhou , Young D. Kwon , Ahmed Hosny Saleh Metwally , Ahmed Tlili et al. 2024 . “ ChatGPT in education: A blessing or a curse? A qualitative study exploring early adopters’ utilization and perceptions .” Computers in Human Behavior: Artificial Humans 2 ( 1 ): 100027 . Mogavi , Reza Hadi , Chao Deng , Justin Juho Kim , Pengyuan Zhou , Young D. Kwon , Ahmed Hosny Saleh Metwally , Ahmed Tlili et al. 2024 . “ ChatGPT in education: A blessing or a curse? A qualitative study exploring early adopters’ utilization and perceptions .” Computers in Human Behavior: Artificial Humans 2 ( 1 ): 100027 . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Munn , L. , Magee , L. , and Arora , V. 2023 . “ Truth machines: synthesizing veracity in AI language models .” AI &amp; society : 1 – 15 . Munn , L. , Magee , L. , and Arora , V. 2023 . “ Truth machines: synthesizing veracity in AI language models .” AI &amp; society: 1 – 15 . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation OpenAI . 2023 . GPT-4 Technical Report . San Francisco : OpenAI . OpenAI . 2023 . GPT-4 Technical Report. San Francisco : OpenAI . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Perkins , Mike , Leon Furze , Jasper Roe , and Jason MacVaugh . 2023 . “ Navigating the generative AI era: Introducing the AI assessment scale for ethical GenAI assessment .” (arXiv: 2312.07086) . arXiv . Perkins , Mike , Leon Furze , Jasper Roe , and Jason MacVaugh . 2023 . “ Navigating the generative AI era: Introducing the AI assessment scale for ethical GenAI assessment .” (arXiv: 2312.07086). arXiv . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Perkins , Mike , Leon Furze , Jasper Roe , and Jason MacVaugh . 2024 . “ The Artificial Intelligence Assessment Scale ( AIAS ): A framework for ethical integration of generative AI in educational assessment .” Journal of University Teaching and Learning Practice 21 ( 6 ): 49 – 66 . Perkins , Mike , Leon Furze , Jasper Roe , and Jason MacVaugh . 2024 . “ The Artificial Intelligence Assessment Scale ( AIAS ): A framework for ethical integration of generative AI in educational assessment .” Journal of University Teaching and Learning Practice 21 ( 6 ): 49 – 66 . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Qadir , Junaid , and Recep Senturk . 2024 . “ Educating for the AI Era: Harnessing the Wild GenAI Horse through Multiplex AI Humanities and Critical AI Literacy .” Available at SSRN 5015109 . Qadir , Junaid , and Recep Senturk . 2024 . “ Educating for the AI Era: Harnessing the Wild GenAI Horse through Multiplex AI Humanities and Critical AI Literacy .” Available at SSRN 5015109. )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Rabb , Intisar . ( 2025 ). “ The Book and AI , Part 2: Testing AI Research Agents for Islamic Law ,” Islamic Law Blog , March 21, 2025, https://islamiclaw.blog/2025/03/21/roundtable-the-book-and-ai-part-2-testing-ai-research-agents-for-islamic-law/ ( accessed 1 June 2025 ). Rabb , Intisar . ( 2025 ). “ The Book and AI , Part 2: Testing AI Research Agents for Islamic Law ,” Islamic Law Blog, March 21, 2025, https://islamiclaw.blog/2025/03/21/roundtable-the-book-and-ai-part-2-testing-ai-research-agents-for-islamic-law/ ( accessed 1 June 2025 ). )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Rawas , S. 2024 . “ ChatGPT: Empowering Lifelong Learning in the Digital Age of Higher Education .” Education and Information Technologies 29 ( 6 ): 6895 – 6908 . Rawas , S. 2024 . “ ChatGPT: Empowering Lifelong Learning in the Digital Age of Higher Education .” Education and Information Technologies 29 ( 6 ): 6895 – 6908 . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Rizvi , Sayyid Muhammad . 2005 . Islamic Inheritance Law in Shia and Sunni Jurisprudence . Toronto : Islamic Publishing House . Rizvi , Sayyid Muhammad . 2005 . Islamic Inheritance Law in Shia and Sunni Jurisprudence. Toronto : Islamic Publishing House . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Shanahan , Murray . 2024 . “ Talking about large language models .” Communications of the ACM 67 ( 2 ): 68 – 79 . Shanahan , Murray . 2024 . “ Talking about large language models .” Communications of the ACM 67 ( 2 ): 68 – 79 . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Susskind , Richard . 2025 . How To Think About AI : A Guide For The Perplexed . Oxford : Oxford University Press . Susskind , Richard . 2025 . How To Think About AI : A Guide For The Perplexed. Oxford : Oxford University Press . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Tahir , Muhammad . 2022 . “ Gender and Inheritance in Islamic Law: A Comparative Study .” Journal of Islamic Legal Studies 15 ( 2 ): 89 – 112 . Tahir , Muhammad . 2022 . “ Gender and Inheritance in Islamic Law: A Comparative Study .” Journal of Islamic Legal Studies 15 ( 2 ): 89 – 112 . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Tlili , A. , B. Shehata , M. A. Adarkwah , A. Bozkurt , D. T. Hickey , R. Huang , and B. Agyemang . 2023 . “ What If the Devil Is My Guardian Angel: ChatGPT as a Case Study of Using Chatbots in Education .” Smart Learning Environments 10 ( 1 ): 15 . Tlili , A. , B. Shehata , M. A. Adarkwah , A. Bozkurt , D. T. Hickey , R. Huang , and B. Agyemang . 2023 . “ What If the Devil Is My Guardian Angel: ChatGPT as a Case Study of Using Chatbots in Education .” Smart Learning Environments 10 ( 1 ): 15 . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Wachter , Sandra , Brent Mittelstadt , and Chris Russell . 2024 . “ Do large language models have a legal duty to tell the truth? .” Royal Society Open Science 11 ( 8 ): 240197 . Wachter , Sandra , Brent Mittelstadt , and Chris Russell . 2024 . “ Do large language models have a legal duty to tell the truth? .” Royal Society Open Science 11 ( 8 ): 240197 . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation White , Jules , Quchen Fu , Sam Hays , Michael Sandborn , Carlos Olea , Henry Gilbert , Ashraf Elnashar , Jesse Spencer-Smith , and Douglas C. Schmidt . 2023 . “ A prompt pattern catalog to enhance prompt engineering with ChatGPT .” arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.11382 . White , Jules , Quchen Fu , Sam Hays , Michael Sandborn , Carlos Olea , Henry Gilbert , Ashraf Elnashar , Jesse Spencer-Smith , and Douglas C. Schmidt . 2023 . “ A prompt pattern catalog to enhance prompt engineering with ChatGPT .” arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.11382. )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Wooldridge , Michael . 2021 . A Brief History of Artificial Intelligence: What It Is, Where We Are, and Where We Are Going . New York : Flatiron Books . Wooldridge , Michael . 2021 . A Brief History of Artificial Intelligence: What It Is, Where We Are, and Where We Are Going. New York : Flatiron Books . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Yeo , Marie Alina , Benjamin Luke Moorhouse , and Yuwei Wan . 2025 . “ From Academic Text to Talk-Show: Deepening Engagement and Understanding with Google NotebookLM .” TESL-EJ 28 ( 4 ) https://doi.org/10.55593/ej.28112int ( accessed 30 May 2025 ). Yeo , Marie Alina , Benjamin Luke Moorhouse , and Yuwei Wan . 2025 . “ From Academic Text to Talk-Show: Deepening Engagement and Understanding with Google NotebookLM .” TESL-EJ 28 ( 4 ) https://doi.org/10.55593/ej.28112int ( accessed 30 May 2025 ). )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Zaman , Muhammad Qasim . 2002 . The Ulama in Contemporary Islam: Custodians of Change . New York : Princeton University Press . Zaman , Muhammad Qasim . 2002 . The Ulama in Contemporary Islam: Custodians of Change. New York : Princeton University Press . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation 1 Edwards (2023) borrows the term “confabulation” from psychology to describe the phenomenon of GenAI making mistakes. He explains that confabulation “occurs when someone’s memory has a gap and the brain convincingly fills in the rest without intending to deceive others.” Other scholars (Hicks et al. 2024) argue that the terms “hallucinations” and “confabulation” anthropomorphize large language models and must be avoided. 2 The limited empirical research on students’ use of GPT-4 suggests caution as one study of GPT-4 assistance of students in law school exams found large variation in the effect of AI assistance, with the worst-performing students seeing the largest gains while the best-performing students seeing declines in their performance (Choi and Schwarcz 2025). 3 For example, if a woman dies and her husband and two sisters are legal heirs. The Quraʾnically prescribed share of the husband is 1/2 and that of sister’s is 2/3. The shares of each legal heir are calculated based on the least common multiple, which is 6 (2 multiplied by 3). The husband is entitled to 3/6 and sisters to 4/6. The collective share of legal heirs are 4 + 3 (7), which is higher than the actual number of 6 shares. Under Shia law, the share of sisters is reduced to 4/6, whereas under Sunni law, the shares of both husband and sisters are reduced. The husband receives 3/7 and sisters 4/7 (Abbasi and Cheema 2024, 339). 4 Nadjma Yassari, “Intestate Succession in Islamic Countries,” in Comparative Succession Law: Volume II : Intestate Succession , ed. Kenneth Reid, Marius de Waal, and Reinhard Zimmermann (Oxford University Press, 2015), 435. 5 Abbasi and Cheema, Family Laws in Pakistan , 332. 6 In one annotation by a different annotator, it explained “Egyptian Law of Inheritance (Law No. 77 of 1943, amended 1946)”. 7 “Succession. In the event of the death of any son or daughter of the propositus before the opening of succession, the children of such son or daughter, if any, living at the time the succession opens, shall per stripes receive a share equivalent to the share which such son or daughter, as the case may be, would have received if alive.” The Muslim Family Laws Ordinance, 1961, section 4. 8 Murray argues that while it is tempting to anthropomorphise large language models, they are actually mathematical models that generate text based on the patterns of words, parts of words, or individual characters (including punctuations) found in a large collection of human-written text that is available online. 9 We used “persona pattern” to give GenAI models a role to play when generating output (White et al. 2023). Title: Scaling Artificial Intelligence for Augmented Learning: Developing a Generative AI Evaluation Scale through a Case Study in Islamic Inheritance Law Article Type: Research Article DOI: https://doi.org/10.1163/27732363-20250002 Language: English Pages: 5–32 Keywords: generative AI ; Islamic inheritance law ; transparency ; accountability ; accuracy ; legal scholarship In: Journal of Digital Islamicate Research In: Volume 3: Issue 1 Received: 26 Jan 2025 Accepted: 19 May 2025 Publisher: Brill E-ISSN: 2773-2363 Subjects: General , Middle East and Islamic Studies , History &amp; Culture , Mathematics &amp; Computer Sciences , Biology , General , Education , Cultural History , Literature and Cultural Studies Export References .ris ProCite RefWorks Reference Manager .bib BibTeX Zotero .enw EndNote Abbasi , M. Z. 2024 . “ Fluidity of Sharīʾa and the Modern State: Inheritance Rights of Childless Widows under Shīʿa Personal Law in British India and Pakistan .” Yearbook of Islamic and Middle Eastern Law 23 ( 1 ): 233 – 263 . Abbasi , M. Z. 2024 . “ Fluidity of Sharīʾa and the Modern State: Inheritance Rights of Childless Widows under Shīʿa Personal Law in British India and Pakistan .” Yearbook of Islamic and Middle Eastern Law 23 ( 1 ): 233 – 263 . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Abbasi , M. Z. and Cheema , S. A. 2024 . Family Laws in Pakistan . Karachi : Oxford University Press . Abbasi , M. Z. and Cheema , S. A. 2024 . Family Laws in Pakistan. Karachi : Oxford University Press . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Ajevski , Marjan , Kim Barker , Andrew Gilbert , Liz Hardie , and Francine Ryan . 2023 . “ ChatGPT and the Future of Legal Education and Practice .” The Law Teacher 57 ( 3 ): 352 – 364 . Ajevski , Marjan , Kim Barker , Andrew Gilbert , Liz Hardie , and Francine Ryan . 2023 . “ ChatGPT and the Future of Legal Education and Practice .” The Law Teacher 57 ( 3 ): 352 – 364 . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Al-Khoei , Ayatollah Abul-Qasim . 1999 . Islamic Laws . Qom : Ansariyan Publications . Al-Khoei , Ayatollah Abul-Qasim . 1999 . Islamic Laws. Qom : Ansariyan Publications . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Al-Marghinani , Burhan al-Din . 1957 . Al-Hidayah (The Guidance) , translated by Charles Hamilton . Lahore : Premier Book House . Al-Marghinani , Burhan al-Din . 1957 . Al-Hidayah (The Guidance), translated by Charles Hamilton . Lahore : Premier Book House . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Al-Shahid al-Thani . 1994 . Sharh al-Lumʾah (The Radiance of Faith) . Beirut : Dar al-Kutub al-Ilmiyya . Al-Shahid al-Thani . 1994 . Sharh al-Lumʾah (The Radiance of Faith). Beirut : Dar al-Kutub al-Ilmiyya . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Bhojani , Ali-Reza , and Marcus Schwarting . 2023 . “ Truth and regret: Large language models, the Qurʾan, and misinformation .” Theology and Science 21 ( 4 ): 557 – 563 . Bhojani , Ali-Reza , and Marcus Schwarting . 2023 . “ Truth and regret: Large language models, the Qurʾan, and misinformation .” Theology and Science 21 ( 4 ): 557 – 563 . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Bliss , John . 2024 . “ Teaching Law in the Age of Generative AI .” Jurimetrics 64 ( 2 ): 111 – 161 . Bliss , John . 2024 . “ Teaching Law in the Age of Generative AI .” Jurimetrics 64 ( 2 ): 111 – 161 . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Bubeck , S. , Chandrasekaran , V. , Eldan , R. , Gehrke , J. , Horvitz , E. , Kamar , E. , Lee , P. , Lee , Y. T. , Li , Y. , Lundberg , S. , Nori , H. , Palangi , H. , Ribeiro , M. T. , and Zhang , Y. 2023 . “ Sparks of Artificial General Intelligence: Early experiments with GPT-4 .” ArXiv . https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.12712 ( accessed 30 May 2025 ). Bubeck , S. , Chandrasekaran , V. , Eldan , R. , Gehrke , J. , Horvitz , E. , Kamar , E. , Lee , P. , Lee , Y. T. , Li , Y. , Lundberg , S. , Nori , H. , Palangi , H. , Ribeiro , M. T. , and Zhang , Y. 2023 . “ Sparks of Artificial General Intelligence: Early experiments with GPT-4 .” ArXiv. https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.12712 ( accessed 30 May 2025 ). )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Budhiraja , Gurneet Singh . 2022 . “ Inheritance under Shia Law: Principles and its Analysis .” Indian Journal of Integrated Research in Law 3 ( 1 ): 1 – 10 . Budhiraja , Gurneet Singh . 2022 . “ Inheritance under Shia Law: Principles and its Analysis .” Indian Journal of Integrated Research in Law 3 ( 1 ): 1 – 10 . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Calder , Norman . 2010 . Introduction to Islamic Law . Edinburgh : Edinburgh University Press . Calder , Norman . 2010 . Introduction to Islamic Law. Edinburgh : Edinburgh University Press . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Carroll , Lucy . 1983 . “ The Hanafi Law of Intestate Succession: A Simplified Approach .” Modern Asian Studies 17 ( 4 ): 629 – 670 . Carroll , Lucy . 1983 . “ The Hanafi Law of Intestate Succession: A Simplified Approach .” Modern Asian Studies 17 ( 4 ): 629 – 670 . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Carroll , Lucy . 1995 . “ Application of the Islamic Law of Succession: Was the Propositus a Sunnī or a Shī˓ī? .” Islamic Law and Society : 24 – 42 . Carroll , Lucy . 1995 . “ Application of the Islamic Law of Succession: Was the Propositus a Sunnī or a Shī˓ī? .” Islamic Law and Society: 24 – 42 . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Chaudhary , Yaqub . 2024 . “ Islam and artificial intelligence .” The Cambridge Companion to Religion and Artificial Intelligence . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . 109 – 130 . Chaudhary , Yaqub . 2024 . “ Islam and artificial intelligence .” The Cambridge Companion to Religion and Artificial Intelligence. Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . 109 – 130 . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Cheema , S. A. 2012 . “ Shia and Sunni Laws of Inheritance: A Comparative Analysis .” Pakistan Journal of Islamic Research 10 : 69 – 82 . Cheema , S. A. 2012 . “ Shia and Sunni Laws of Inheritance: A Comparative Analysis .” Pakistan Journal of Islamic Research 10 : 69 – 82 . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Cheema , S. A. 2021 . “ Distribution of inheritance under Islamic law: An appraisal of online inheritance calculators .” Journal of Islamic Thought and Civilization 11 ( 1 ): 112 – 131 . Cheema , S. A. 2021 . “ Distribution of inheritance under Islamic law: An appraisal of online inheritance calculators .” Journal of Islamic Thought and Civilization 11 ( 1 ): 112 – 131 . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Cheema , S. A. 2023 . “ Section 4 of Pakistan’s Muslim Family Laws Ordinance, 1961: An Exploration of Interpretive Tensions .” Manchester Journal of Transnational Islamic Law &amp; Practice 19 ( 2 ): 2 – 19 . Cheema , S. A. 2023 . “ Section 4 of Pakistan’s Muslim Family Laws Ordinance, 1961: An Exploration of Interpretive Tensions .” Manchester Journal of Transnational Islamic Law &amp; Practice 19 ( 2 ): 2 – 19 . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Cheema , S. A. 2024 . “ Reappraisal of Lucy Carroll’s Tripartite Thesis on Section 4 of Pakistan’s Muslim Family Laws Ordinance 1961 .” Manchester Journal of Transnational Islamic Law &amp; Practice 20 ( 2 ): 1 – 16 . Cheema , S. A. 2024 . “ Reappraisal of Lucy Carroll’s Tripartite Thesis on Section 4 of Pakistan’s Muslim Family Laws Ordinance 1961 .” Manchester Journal of Transnational Islamic Law &amp; Practice 20 ( 2 ): 1 – 16 . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Choi , J. H. and Schwarcz , Daniel . 2025 . “ AI Assistance in Legal Analysis: An Empirical Study .” Journal of Legal Education 73 ( 2 ): 385 – 420 . Choi , J. H. and Schwarcz , Daniel . 2025 . “ AI Assistance in Legal Analysis: An Empirical Study .” Journal of Legal Education 73 ( 2 ): 385 – 420 . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Cong-Lem , N. , Soyoof , A. , and Tsering , D. 2024 . “ A Systematic Review of the Limitations and Associated Opportunities of ChatGPT .” International Journal of Human– Computer Interaction , 41 ( 7 ), 3851 – 3866 . Cong-Lem , N. , Soyoof , A. , and Tsering , D. 2024 . “ A Systematic Review of the Limitations and Associated Opportunities of ChatGPT .” International Journal of Human– Computer Interaction, 41 ( 7 ), 3851 – 3866 . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Cotton , D. R. , P. A. Cotton , and J. R. Shipway . 2024 . “ Chatting and Cheating: Ensuring Academic Integrity in the Era of ChatGPT .” Innovations in Education and Teaching International 61 ( 2 ): 228 – 239 . Cotton , D. R. , P. A. Cotton , and J. R. Shipway . 2024 . “ Chatting and Cheating: Ensuring Academic Integrity in the Era of ChatGPT .” Innovations in Education and Teaching International 61 ( 2 ): 228 – 239 . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Coulson , Noel James . 1971 . Succession in the Muslim Family . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . Coulson , Noel James . 1971 . Succession in the Muslim Family. Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Dai , Yun , Ang Liu , and Cher Ping Lim . 2023 . “ Reconceptualizing ChatGPT and generative AI as a student-driven innovation in higher education .” Procedia CIRP 119 ( 2023 ): 84 – 90 . Dai , Yun , Ang Liu , and Cher Ping Lim . 2023 . “ Reconceptualizing ChatGPT and generative AI as a student-driven innovation in higher education .” Procedia CIRP 119 ( 2023 ): 84 – 90 . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Edwards , Benj . 2025 . Why ChatGPT and Bing Chat are So Good at Making Things Up: A Look Inside the Hallucinating Artificial Minds of the Famous Text Prediction Bots . ars technica , April 6, 2023. 2023, https://arstechnica.com/information-technology/2023/04/why-ai-chatbots-are-the-ultimate-bs-machines-and-how-people-hope-to-fix-them/ ( accessed 1 June 2025 ). Edwards , Benj . 2025 . Why ChatGPT and Bing Chat are So Good at Making Things Up: A Look Inside the Hallucinating Artificial Minds of the Famous Text Prediction Bots . ars technica, April 6, 2023. 2023, https://arstechnica.com/information-technology/2023/04/why-ai-chatbots-are-the-ultimate-bs-machines-and-how-people-hope-to-fix-them/ ( accessed 1 June 2025 ). )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Eke , D. O. 2023 . “ ChatGPT and the Rise of Generative AI : Threat to Academic Integrity? ” Journal of Responsible Technology 13 : 100060 . Eke , D. O. 2023 . “ ChatGPT and the Rise of Generative AI : Threat to Academic Integrity? ” Journal of Responsible Technology 13 : 100060 . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Fatima , Haseeb . 2024 . “ A Critical Appraisal of Obligatory Bequest as Prevalent in Muslim Countries .” Islamic Studies 63 ( 2 ): 213 – 240 . Fatima , Haseeb . 2024 . “ A Critical Appraisal of Obligatory Bequest as Prevalent in Muslim Countries .” Islamic Studies 63 ( 2 ): 213 – 240 . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Furze , Leon , Mike Perkins , Jasper Roe , and Jason MacVaugh . 2024 . “ The AI Assessment Scale ( AIAS ) in action: A pilot implementation of GenAI-supported assessment .” Australasian Journal of Educational Technology 40 ( 4 ): 38 – 55 . Furze , Leon , Mike Perkins , Jasper Roe , and Jason MacVaugh . 2024 . “ The AI Assessment Scale ( AIAS ) in action: A pilot implementation of GenAI-supported assessment .” Australasian Journal of Educational Technology 40 ( 4 ): 38 – 55 . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Fyzee , Asaf A. A. 2008 . Outlines of Muhammadan Law . 5th ed. Oxford : Oxford University Press . Fyzee , Asaf A. A. 2008 . Outlines of Muhammadan Law. 5th ed. Oxford : Oxford University Press . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Ghaly , Mohammed . 2024 . “ What Makes Work ‘Good’ in the Age of Artificial Intelligence ( AI )? Islamic Perspectives on AI -Mediated Work Ethics .” The Journal of Ethics 28 ( 3 ): 429 – 453 . Ghaly , Mohammed . 2024 . “ What Makes Work ‘Good’ in the Age of Artificial Intelligence ( AI )? Islamic Perspectives on AI -Mediated Work Ethics .” The Journal of Ethics 28 ( 3 ): 429 – 453 . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Giannakos , Michail , Roger Azevedo , Peter Brusilovsky , Mutlu Cukurova , Yannis Dimitriadis , Davinia Hernandez-Leo , Sanna Järvelä , Manolis Mavrikis , and Bart Rienties . 2024 . “ The promise and challenges of generative AI in education .” Behaviour &amp; Information Technology : 1 – 27 . Giannakos , Michail , Roger Azevedo , Peter Brusilovsky , Mutlu Cukurova , Yannis Dimitriadis , Davinia Hernandez-Leo , Sanna Järvelä , Manolis Mavrikis , and Bart Rienties . 2024 . “ The promise and challenges of generative AI in education .” Behaviour &amp; Information Technology: 1 – 27 . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Hicks , Michael Townsen , James Humphries , and Joe Slater . 2024 . “ ChatGPT is bullshit .” Ethics and Information Technology 26 ( 2 ): 1 – 10 . Hicks , Michael Townsen , James Humphries , and Joe Slater . 2024 . “ ChatGPT is bullshit .” Ethics and Information Technology 26 ( 2 ): 1 – 10 . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Ibn Rushd . 1996 . Bidayat al-Mujtahid wa Nihayat al-Muqtasid (The Distinguished Jurist’s Primer) . Translated by Imran Ahsan Khan Nyazee . Reading : Garnet Publishing . Ibn Rushd . 1996 . Bidayat al-Mujtahid wa Nihayat al-Muqtasid (The Distinguished Jurist’s Primer). Translated by Imran Ahsan Khan Nyazee . Reading : Garnet Publishing . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation İpek , Ziyaeddin Halid , Ali Ibrahim Can Gözüm , Stamatios Papadakis , and Michail Kallogiannakis . 2023 . “ Educational Applications of the ChatGPT AI System: A Systematic Review Research .” Educational Process: International Journal 12 ( 3 ): 26 – 55 . İpek , Ziyaeddin Halid , Ali Ibrahim Can Gözüm , Stamatios Papadakis , and Michail Kallogiannakis . 2023 . “ Educational Applications of the ChatGPT AI System: A Systematic Review Research .” Educational Process: International Journal 12 ( 3 ): 26 – 55 . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Ji , Ziwei , Nayeon Lee , Rita Frieske , Tiezheng Yu , Dan Su , Yan Xu , Etsuko Ishii , Ye Jin Bang , Andrea Madotto , and Pascale Fung . 2023 . “ Survey of hallucination in natural language generation .” ACM computing surveys 55 ( 12 ): 1 – 38 . Ji , Ziwei , Nayeon Lee , Rita Frieske , Tiezheng Yu , Dan Su , Yan Xu , Etsuko Ishii , Ye Jin Bang , Andrea Madotto , and Pascale Fung . 2023 . “ Survey of hallucination in natural language generation .” ACM computing surveys 55 ( 12 ): 1 – 38 . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Khan , Hamid . 2007 . The Islamic Law of Inheritance . Oxford : Oxford University Press . Khan , Hamid . 2007 . The Islamic Law of Inheritance. Oxford : Oxford University Press . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Kidd , Celeste , and Abeba Birhane . 2023 . “ How AI can distort human beliefs .” Science 380 ( 6651 ): 1222 – 1223 . Kidd , Celeste , and Abeba Birhane . 2023 . “ How AI can distort human beliefs .” Science 380 ( 6651 ): 1222 – 1223 . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Kılınç , Selçuk . 2024 . “ Comprehensive AI assessment framework: Enhancing educational evaluation with ethical AI integration .” Journal of Educational Technology and Online Learning 7 ( 4 ) ICETOL 2024 Special Issue 521 – 540 . Kılınç , Selçuk . 2024 . “ Comprehensive AI assessment framework: Enhancing educational evaluation with ethical AI integration .” Journal of Educational Technology and Online Learning 7 ( 4 ) ICETOL 2024 Special Issue 521 – 540 . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Maghniyyah , Muhammad Jawad . 1997 . Shia Law . Beirut : Dar al-Ilm . Maghniyyah , Muhammad Jawad . 1997 . Shia Law. Beirut : Dar al-Ilm . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Mahmood , Tahir . 1985 . Islamic Law and Contemporary Legal Issues . New Delhi : Indian Law Institute . Mahmood , Tahir . 1985 . Islamic Law and Contemporary Legal Issues. New Delhi : Indian Law Institute . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Malik , Shoaib Ahmed . 2023 . “ Artificial Intelligence and Islamic Thought: Two Distinctive Challenges .” Journal of Islamic and Muslim Studies 8 ( 2 ): 108 – 115 . Malik , Shoaib Ahmed . 2023 . “ Artificial Intelligence and Islamic Thought: Two Distinctive Challenges .” Journal of Islamic and Muslim Studies 8 ( 2 ): 108 – 115 . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Memarian , Bahar , and Tenzin Doleck . 2023 . “ ChatGPT in education: Methods, potentials, and limitations .” Computers in Human Behavior: Artificial Humans 1 ( 2 ): 100022 . Memarian , Bahar , and Tenzin Doleck . 2023 . “ ChatGPT in education: Methods, potentials, and limitations .” Computers in Human Behavior: Artificial Humans 1 ( 2 ): 100022 . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Microsoft Research . March 2023 . “ Sparks of Artificial General Intelligence: Early Experiments with GPT-4 .” arXiv Preprint . https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.12712 . Microsoft Research . March 2023 . “ Sparks of Artificial General Intelligence: Early Experiments with GPT-4 .” arXiv Preprint. https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.12712 . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Mogavi , Reza Hadi , Chao Deng , Justin Juho Kim , Pengyuan Zhou , Young D. Kwon , Ahmed Hosny Saleh Metwally , Ahmed Tlili et al. 2024 . “ ChatGPT in education: A blessing or a curse? A qualitative study exploring early adopters’ utilization and perceptions .” Computers in Human Behavior: Artificial Humans 2 ( 1 ): 100027 . Mogavi , Reza Hadi , Chao Deng , Justin Juho Kim , Pengyuan Zhou , Young D. Kwon , Ahmed Hosny Saleh Metwally , Ahmed Tlili et al. 2024 . “ ChatGPT in education: A blessing or a curse? A qualitative study exploring early adopters’ utilization and perceptions .” Computers in Human Behavior: Artificial Humans 2 ( 1 ): 100027 . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Munn , L. , Magee , L. , and Arora , V. 2023 . “ Truth machines: synthesizing veracity in AI language models .” AI &amp; society : 1 – 15 . Munn , L. , Magee , L. , and Arora , V. 2023 . “ Truth machines: synthesizing veracity in AI language models .” AI &amp; society: 1 – 15 . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation OpenAI . 2023 . GPT-4 Technical Report . San Francisco : OpenAI . OpenAI . 2023 . GPT-4 Technical Report. San Francisco : OpenAI . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Perkins , Mike , Leon Furze , Jasper Roe , and Jason MacVaugh . 2023 . “ Navigating the generative AI era: Introducing the AI assessment scale for ethical GenAI assessment .” (arXiv: 2312.07086) . arXiv . Perkins , Mike , Leon Furze , Jasper Roe , and Jason MacVaugh . 2023 . “ Navigating the generative AI era: Introducing the AI assessment scale for ethical GenAI assessment .” (arXiv: 2312.07086). arXiv . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Perkins , Mike , Leon Furze , Jasper Roe , and Jason MacVaugh . 2024 . “ The Artificial Intelligence Assessment Scale ( AIAS ): A framework for ethical integration of generative AI in educational assessment .” Journal of University Teaching and Learning Practice 21 ( 6 ): 49 – 66 . Perkins , Mike , Leon Furze , Jasper Roe , and Jason MacVaugh . 2024 . “ The Artificial Intelligence Assessment Scale ( AIAS ): A framework for ethical integration of generative AI in educational assessment .” Journal of University Teaching and Learning Practice 21 ( 6 ): 49 – 66 . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Qadir , Junaid , and Recep Senturk . 2024 . “ Educating for the AI Era: Harnessing the Wild GenAI Horse through Multiplex AI Humanities and Critical AI Literacy .” Available at SSRN 5015109 . Qadir , Junaid , and Recep Senturk . 2024 . “ Educating for the AI Era: Harnessing the Wild GenAI Horse through Multiplex AI Humanities and Critical AI Literacy .” Available at SSRN 5015109. )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Rabb , Intisar . ( 2025 ). “ The Book and AI , Part 2: Testing AI Research Agents for Islamic Law ,” Islamic Law Blog , March 21, 2025, https://islamiclaw.blog/2025/03/21/roundtable-the-book-and-ai-part-2-testing-ai-research-agents-for-islamic-law/ ( accessed 1 June 2025 ). Rabb , Intisar . ( 2025 ). “ The Book and AI , Part 2: Testing AI Research Agents for Islamic Law ,” Islamic Law Blog, March 21, 2025, https://islamiclaw.blog/2025/03/21/roundtable-the-book-and-ai-part-2-testing-ai-research-agents-for-islamic-law/ ( accessed 1 June 2025 ). )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Rawas , S. 2024 . “ ChatGPT: Empowering Lifelong Learning in the Digital Age of Higher Education .” Education and Information Technologies 29 ( 6 ): 6895 – 6908 . Rawas , S. 2024 . “ ChatGPT: Empowering Lifelong Learning in the Digital Age of Higher Education .” Education and Information Technologies 29 ( 6 ): 6895 – 6908 . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Rizvi , Sayyid Muhammad . 2005 . Islamic Inheritance Law in Shia and Sunni Jurisprudence . Toronto : Islamic Publishing House . Rizvi , Sayyid Muhammad . 2005 . Islamic Inheritance Law in Shia and Sunni Jurisprudence. Toronto : Islamic Publishing House . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Shanahan , Murray . 2024 . “ Talking about large language models .” Communications of the ACM 67 ( 2 ): 68 – 79 . Shanahan , Murray . 2024 . “ Talking about large language models .” Communications of the ACM 67 ( 2 ): 68 – 79 . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Susskind , Richard . 2025 . How To Think About AI : A Guide For The Perplexed . Oxford : Oxford University Press . Susskind , Richard . 2025 . How To Think About AI : A Guide For The Perplexed. Oxford : Oxford University Press . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Tahir , Muhammad . 2022 . “ Gender and Inheritance in Islamic Law: A Comparative Study .” Journal of Islamic Legal Studies 15 ( 2 ): 89 – 112 . Tahir , Muhammad . 2022 . “ Gender and Inheritance in Islamic Law: A Comparative Study .” Journal of Islamic Legal Studies 15 ( 2 ): 89 – 112 . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Tlili , A. , B. Shehata , M. A. Adarkwah , A. Bozkurt , D. T. Hickey , R. Huang , and B. Agyemang . 2023 . “ What If the Devil Is My Guardian Angel: ChatGPT as a Case Study of Using Chatbots in Education .” Smart Learning Environments 10 ( 1 ): 15 . Tlili , A. , B. Shehata , M. A. Adarkwah , A. Bozkurt , D. T. Hickey , R. Huang , and B. Agyemang . 2023 . “ What If the Devil Is My Guardian Angel: ChatGPT as a Case Study of Using Chatbots in Education .” Smart Learning Environments 10 ( 1 ): 15 . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Wachter , Sandra , Brent Mittelstadt , and Chris Russell . 2024 . “ Do large language models have a legal duty to tell the truth? .” Royal Society Open Science 11 ( 8 ): 240197 . Wachter , Sandra , Brent Mittelstadt , and Chris Russell . 2024 . “ Do large language models have a legal duty to tell the truth? .” Royal Society Open Science 11 ( 8 ): 240197 . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation White , Jules , Quchen Fu , Sam Hays , Michael Sandborn , Carlos Olea , Henry Gilbert , Ashraf Elnashar , Jesse Spencer-Smith , and Douglas C. Schmidt . 2023 . “ A prompt pattern catalog to enhance prompt engineering with ChatGPT .” arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.11382 . White , Jules , Quchen Fu , Sam Hays , Michael Sandborn , Carlos Olea , Henry Gilbert , Ashraf Elnashar , Jesse Spencer-Smith , and Douglas C. Schmidt . 2023 . “ A prompt pattern catalog to enhance prompt engineering with ChatGPT .” arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.11382. )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Wooldridge , Michael . 2021 . A Brief History of Artificial Intelligence: What It Is, Where We Are, and Where We Are Going . New York : Flatiron Books . Wooldridge , Michael . 2021 . A Brief History of Artificial Intelligence: What It Is, Where We Are, and Where We Are Going. New York : Flatiron Books . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Yeo , Marie Alina , Benjamin Luke Moorhouse , and Yuwei Wan . 2025 . “ From Academic Text to Talk-Show: Deepening Engagement and Understanding with Google NotebookLM .” TESL-EJ 28 ( 4 ) https://doi.org/10.55593/ej.28112int ( accessed 30 May 2025 ). Yeo , Marie Alina , Benjamin Luke Moorhouse , and Yuwei Wan . 2025 . “ From Academic Text to Talk-Show: Deepening Engagement and Understanding with Google NotebookLM .” TESL-EJ 28 ( 4 ) https://doi.org/10.55593/ej.28112int ( accessed 30 May 2025 ). )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Zaman , Muhammad Qasim . 2002 . The Ulama in Contemporary Islam: Custodians of Change . New York : Princeton University Press . Zaman , Muhammad Qasim . 2002 . The Ulama in Contemporary Islam: Custodians of Change. New York : Princeton University Press . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Export Figures View in gallery Table 1 Differences between Sunni and Shia Inheritance Law View in gallery Table 2 View in gallery Table 3 View in gallery Table 4 View in gallery Table 5 View in gallery Table 6 View in gallery Table 7 View in gallery Table 8 View in gallery Table 9 ChatGPT-4 View in gallery Table 10 DeepSeek View in gallery Table 11 Co-Pilot View in gallery Table 12 Gemini View in gallery Table 13 View in gallery Chart 1 Comparison of GenAI models on various evaluation metrics View in gallery GenAI Application Scale ( GAIAS ) Close View raw image Download Powerpoint Slide --> --> Table 1 Differences between Sunni and Shia Inheritance Law View raw image Download Powerpoint Slide --> --> Table 2 View raw image Download Powerpoint Slide --> --> Table 3 View raw image Download Powerpoint Slide --> --> Table 4 View raw image Download Powerpoint Slide --> --> Table 5 View raw image Download Powerpoint Slide --> --> Table 6 View raw image Download Powerpoint Slide --> --> Table 7 View raw image Download Powerpoint Slide --> --> Table 8 View raw image Download Powerpoint Slide --> --> Table 9 ChatGPT-4 View raw image Download Powerpoint Slide --> --> Table 10 DeepSeek View raw image Download Powerpoint Slide --> --> Table 11 Co-Pilot View raw image Download Powerpoint Slide --> --> Table 12 Gemini View raw image Download Powerpoint Slide --> --> Table 13 View raw image Download Powerpoint Slide --> --> Chart 1 Comparison of GenAI models on various evaluation metrics View raw image Download Powerpoint Slide --> --> GenAI Application Scale ( GAIAS ) All Time Past 365 days Past 30 Days Abstract Views 54 54 54 Full Text Views 20 20 20 PDF Views & Downloads 43 43 43 Scaling Artificial Intelligence for Augmented Learning: Developing a Generative AI Evaluation Scale through a Case Study in Islamic Inheritance Law In: Journal of Digital Islamicate Research Author: Dr Muhammad Zubair Abbasi Dr Muhammad Zubair Abbasi Lecturer, School of Law and Social Sciences, Royal Holloway, University of London Egham, Surrey Search for other papers by Dr Muhammad Zubair Abbasi in Current site Google Scholar PubMed Close https://orcid.org/0000-0003-1561-5457 View More View Less Online Publication Date: 19 Aug 2025 Open Access Download PDF Download Citation Get Permissions Abstract Full Text Metadata Abstract This study evaluates the potential of four Generative Artificial Intelligence (GenAI) models – ChatGPT-4, DeepSeek, Gemini, and Co-Pilot – to apply the principles of Islamic inheritance law. Using a GenAI Evaluation Scale ( GAIES ), the research assesses the accuracy, comprehensiveness, explainability, and authenticity of AI -generated responses on key topics, such as gender-based inheritance differences, orphaned grandchildren’s right to inheritance, and state-reformed inheritance laws in Egypt, Pakistan, and Iran. While ChatGPT-4 outperformed its counterparts, it still exhibited significant shortcomings, such as fabricated references and legal misinterpretations. To address these challenges, the study introduces a GenAI Application Scale ( GAIAS ) as a guide for the ethical use of GenAI in Islamic legal education and research. The research highlights potential risks related to AI -generated “hallucinations,” fabrications, and opaque sources, emphasizing the need for human oversight to ensure that GenAI outputs are accurate, reliable, and verifiable. Keywords: generative AI ; Islamic inheritance law ; transparency ; accountability ; accuracy ; legal scholarship 1 Introduction The advent of generative artificial intelligence (GenAI) and large language models ( LLM s) such as ChatGPT has been likened to revolutionary technologies like the printing press, electricity, and the internet due to their unprecedented data-processing capabilities (Susskind 2025, 44–45; Wooldridge 2021, 3). However, significant concerns persist regarding their accuracy, embedded biases, and the authenticity of AI -generated knowledge (Kidd and Birhane 2023; Munn et al. 2023). The capacity of GenAI to interpret and synthesize religious texts raises critical epistemological questions about the reliability of machine-generated Islamic legal knowledge (fiqh) . This is particularly significant given that traditional Islamic scholarship derives its authority from rigorous human engagement with primary sources – the Qurʾān and ḥadīth – guided by piety, intellectual rigor, and a commitment to truth (Zaman 2002, 38–59). The rise of GenAI thus challenges longstanding scholarly norms, as algorithmic outputs lack the moral and spiritual dimensions integral to Islamic juristic tradition. Several scholars argue that current GenAI models are ill-equipped to interpret Islamic law, as they neglect the spiritual, moral, and doctrinal elements fundamental to Islamic legal reasoning (Chaudhary 2024). Concerns also include algorithmic opacity and the models’ inability to address novel legal issues requiring human judgment (Qadir and Senturk 2024). A further limitation is the lack of accessible, digitized, and machine-readable sources of Islamic law in GenAI training data (Rabb 2025). Emerging developments such as the iMufti – an AI system capable of issuing fatāwā (religious edicts) – exemplify both the potential and pitfalls of automated jurisprudence (Malik 2023). While such tools risk undermining the human-centric nature of Islamic legal authority, they also offer transformative opportunities, particularly in facilitating ijtihād (independent legal reasoning) by granting scholars rapid access to vast repositories of classical texts. Digital platforms like Maktaba Shamila and AI -powered inheritance calculators have rendered textual analysis more efficient, making technology an indispensable aid for contemporary scholars (Verkinderen 2020). While GenAI enhances the procedural aspects of ijtihād – enabling faster retrieval and synthesis of legal precedents, it cannot replicate the ethical and interpretative depth of human scholarship. The objective of this study is to evaluate the performance of GenAI models in answering Islamic inheritance law queries, assessing their accuracy in ensuring accurate distribution of shares according to classical legal principles and state-specific legal reforms. It evaluates the impact of GenAI on Islamic legal scholarship, specifically within the context of inheritance law. By focusing on Large Language Models ( LLM s) such as ChatGPT-4, DeepSeek, Gemini, and Co-Pilot, the research evaluates their performance in addressing inheritance-law related questions under Sunni and Shia jurisprudence across Egypt, Pakistan, and Iran. These countries are selected for this study due to their diverse approaches to implementing Islamic inheritance laws. As majority-Muslim countries with distinct legal systems – Pakistan’s Sunni Hanafi tradition in the common law system, Egypt’s mixed civil-Sharia framework, and Iran’s Shia-majority jurisprudence – they provide a representative sample of how Islamic inheritance rules are interpreted and applied across different schools of thought and jurisdictions. The rules governing Islamic inheritance ( ʿilm al-farāʾiḍ ) are precise and deterministic, making them well-suited for AI -driven computation. Unlike other domains of Islamic law, which often involve interpretative flexibility and juristic disagreement (ikhtilāf) , inheritance shares are explicitly defined in the Qurʾān (e.g., Q 4:11–12) with mathematical exactness. Classical jurists subsequently developed a coherent system of legal rules that leaves minimal room for subjective judgment, ensuring predictable outcomes. This computational clarity has enabled the development of online Islamic inheritance calculators, which accurately distribute shares among heirs by applying fixed juristic formulas. Empirical studies confirm that these tools not only perform calculations with precision but also transparently cite the underlying Qurʾānic verses and juristic principles (Cheema 2021). By automating a traditionally manual process, these calculators demonstrate the potential for technology to streamline Sharīʿa -compliant rulings. GenAI models go even further, responding to prompts and providing customized and personalized information based on much larger datasets. Through various inheritance scenarios, the paper tests the AI models’ ability to handle both simple and complex legal cases, such as those involving the shares of spouses, siblings, children, and grandchildren. It compares the AI -generated rulings to actual jurisprudential outcomes as prescribed by Sunni and Shia law in authoritative classical and modern treatises while also evaluating how the models recognize and integrate state-specific reforms in countries like Pakistan, Iran, and Egypt. The research methodology employs the application of two custom-designed evaluation and application tools: the GenAI Evaluation Scale ( GAIES ) and the GenAI Application Scale ( GAIAS ). The GAIES measures the accuracy of AI -generated legal information and the authenticity of the references provided; additionally, GAIAS provides guidelines for the practical use of these models for law students, scholars, and practitioners. The key findings reveal that ChatGPT-4 consistently outperformed the other models. However, it occasionally struggled to incorporate the nuances of modern legal reforms, which are essential in understanding how Islamic inheritance law is applied today. The performance of DeepSeek is similar to that of ChatGPT-4, but it falls slightly behind it. Both Gemini and Co-Pilot exhibited significantly lower accuracy, often misapplying key legal principles or failing to recognize distinctions between Sunni and Shia inheritance laws. One of the most significant issues identified across all AI models was the phenomenon of “hallucination,” where the AI produced fabricated references or incorrect information (Ji et al. 2023). 1 It raises serious concerns about accountability and transparency, as such errors can mislead users into trusting faulty legal information (Wachter 2024). In the context of Islamic inheritance law, where fairness and justice are deeply rooted in ethical and religious norms, these errors can have profound consequences (Bhojani an Schwarting 2023). This research highlights both the potential and the limitations of GenAI models in the domain of Islamic inheritance law. GenAI models like ChatGPT-4 and DeepSeek hold promise as powerful tools for assisting legal scholars and researchers; however, their limited transparency and susceptibility to errors underscore the essential need for human oversight. The study suggests that while GenAI can play a supportive role in legal research, particularly by providing quick and structured overviews, it cannot yet replace the depth and precision of understanding required for complex legal rulings. 2 2 Methodology Shortly after the release of ChatGPT-4 in March 2023, a team from Microsoft Research assessed its capabilities, posing the question: “How can we measure the intelligence of an LLM that has been trained on an unknown but extremely vast corpus of web-text data?” (Bubeck et al. 2023, 6). They aimed to probe GPT-4 ’s responses to evaluate its consistency, coherence, and correctness while identifying its limitations and biases. Following this example, this paper assesses the accuracy and authenticity of the information generated by LLM s related to Islamic inheritance law. To this end, I selected the widely available free versions of OpenAI’s ChatGPT-4, Chinese company High-Flyer’s DeepSeek, Google’s Gemini, and Microsoft’s Co-Pilot. To account for the non-deterministic nature of GenAI outputs (where responses vary across users), this study employed a triple- annotator methodology to generate and evaluate response sets, ensuring robust and reliable assessment. We posed five questions concerning Islamic inheritance law, ranging from simple to complex cases. These include: General differences between Sunni and Shia inheritance laws; Simple propositions that do not involve differences between Sunni and Shia schools; Slightly complex propositions on which Sunni and Shia schools differ, such as the inheritance rights of widows and daughters; Moderately complex propositions that require readjustments of legal heirs after applying the general rules of Islamic inheritance law; and Very complex propositions on which state-enforced laws in Muslim- majority states differ from classical Islamic inheritance law and have been subjected to multiple judicial interpretations. The AI models’ responses are evaluated using the GenAI Evaluation Scale ( GAIES ). The five parameters for evaluation are as follows: Accuracy: The correctness of the AI -generated responses is measured against established Islamic legal principles. Comprehensiveness: The extent to which the AI models provide thorough and complete answers to the prompts. Explainability: The clarity and reasoning behind the AI -generated responses, including the explanation of how the responses were derived from the primary and secondary sources of Islamic law. Authenticity of References: The authenticity of the sources referenced by the AI models, ensuring that they align with commonly accepted legal texts. Structure of Information: The organization and flow of the legal ruling produced by the AI models, assessing whether the ruling is presented logically and coherently. Each AI model’s performance is scored based on these five parameters, and the results are compared to determine which model provides the most accurate and authentic legal rulings. Each parameter carries a maximum of 4 marks, and each proposition carries a maximum of 20 marks. As each AI model is prompted to respond to 5 questions, the maximum marks that each model could score are 100 (20 multiplied by 5). To systematically assess the quality of GenAI outputs in Islamic inheritance law, we developed a scoring framework that recognizes and differentiates key dimensions of output reliability. The framework awards higher scores to responses that demonstrate legal accuracy, correct citation of primary and secondary sources, sound juristic reasoning, completeness, and clear structure. This approach highlights the strengths of GenAI models while also identifying the areas of improvement while distinguishing whether challenges arise from gaps in legal knowledge, reasoning limitations, reference inconsistencies, or fabrications. 3 Results and Discussion Question 1: Differences between Sunni and Shia schools in Inheritance Law One of the most important distinctions between Sunni and Shia inheritance law is that Shia law is generally more gender-sensitive than Sunni law (Cheema 2012). While Sunni law gives preference to agnates (relatives through the male line), Shia law prioritizes the nearest relative, whether agnate or cognate. This difference has significant implications for determining the shares of legal heirs. For example, if a deceased person leaves behind only a daughter and no son, Sunni law grants the daughter half of the inheritance, with the remaining half going to the deceased’s agnatic relatives. In contrast, Shia law awards the daughter the entire estate in the absence of a son (Carroll 1995). Several other important differences between Sunni and Shia inheritance laws include: Both Sunni and Shia law recognize two main categories of legal heirs: Sharers (also called Qurʾanic heirs, as their shares are prescribed in the Qurʾan) and Residuaries. Sunni law recognizes thirteen Sharers, but Shia law identifies only nine Sharers and excludes grandparents and the son’s daughter from Sharers. Shia law does not acknowledge a third category of legal heirs known as Distant Kindred. Shia law divides heirs into three main classes, alongside the categories of Sharers and Residuaries. Unlike Sunni law, Shia law does not apply the rule of increase ( aūl ), which adjusts shares among heirs in specific circumstances. 3 Shia law applies the principle of representation for distributing inheritance among distant relatives. Under Shia law, a widow does not inherit land. Instead, she only receives a share in movable property, including the value of any buildings on the land. 4 We posed the following question to AI models: “You are an expert in Islamic law, please provide an answer to this question: What are the differences between Sunni and Shia schools regarding Islamic inheritance law?” Gemini listed six key differences between Sunni and Shia inheritance laws. While the answer correctly highlighted some key differences, including the role of the Imam (spiritual leader), the doctrine of return ( radd ), the inheritance of females, and the inheritance of distant relatives, it contained several incorrect statements. For example, Gemini stated, “Shia law generally gives females equal shares to males, but there are some exceptions based on specific circumstances.” This is incorrect even though Shia law favorably treats females; it does not give them “equal shares.” Similarly, Gemini’s statement that “Sunni law gives parents a fixed share of the inheritance, regardless of whether the deceased had children or not” is incorrect. Parents receive a 1/6 share if there are children of the deceased, and the mother receives 1/3 if there are no children. In the absence of surviving children, the father’s inheritance share varies: he receives either (a) the residual two-thirds (after the mother’s mandatory one-third share) when the mother survives, or (b) the entire estate if the mother has predeceased. Like Gemini, DeepSeek listed six key differences and provided several incorrect statements. For instance, it incorrectly stated, “Sons and daughters inherit equally in some cases”. Similarly, it wrongly stated that illegitimate children “may inherit from their mother” under Shia law. 5 In contrast, the Co-pilot highlighted only three differences between Sunni and Shia inheritance laws. On women’s right to inheritance, it correctly stated: “Similar to Sunni law, women receive a fixed share, but the distribution can be more equitable depending on the circumstances.” Co-Pilot produced only one incorrect statement, “Shia law allows for descendants of predeceased heirs to inherit in their place, which is not always the case in Sunni law.” This is an inaccurate description of the rule of representation under Islamic inheritance law. The accuracy scores of Gemini and DeepSeek were 2/4, while Co-Pilot scored 3/4. Both Gemini and DeepSeek scored better on comprehensiveness: 3/4 they highlighted six differences against three by Co-Pilot, which scored 2/4 on this parameter. Gemini and DeepSeek also scored better on explainability, 3/4 against Co-Pilot’s 2/4. Co-Pilot produced a few vague statements, such as “While Shia law also follows the Quranic shares, there is more flexibility in distributing the estate among heirs.” There is no explanation of what “flexibility” means in this context. Initially, Gemini did not provide any references. When prompted to provide references on which its answer was based, it stated, “As an AI language model, I cannot provide specific citations for the information I provide.” Nonetheless, it listed three books and three websites. The books included Islamic Law and Contemporary Legal Issues by Tahir Mahmood, Introduction to Islamic Law by Norman Calder, and Shia Law by Muhammad Jawad Maghniyyah. While all three authors have written on Islamic law, the titles of all three books are fabricated. However, the web addresses of the three websites https://www.al-islam.org/ , https://islamqa.info/en , and https://www.islamicfinder.org/ were correct. In contrast, Co-Pilot cited two online research papers available at ijirl.com and iri.aiou.edu.pk on the differences between Sunni and Shia inheritance laws, and referred to the exact page numbers in Fyzee’s book, Outlines of Mohammadan Law , which was cited in one of the papers (Budhiraja 2022). As Co-Pilot’s references were authentic and verifiable, it scored full marks 4/4 on the Authenticity of References parameter. Gemini, DeepSeek, and Co-Pilot produced well-structured answers with short introductions and conclusions and a main body comprising several headings. In the overall score on the first question, Co-Pilot performed relatively better than Gemini, scoring 15/20 against 13/20. DeepSeek performed better than both, scoring 16/20. The answer provided by ChatGPT-4 was the most comprehensive. It identified eight differences and summarized the key differences in the following table: View Full Size Table 1 Differences between Sunni and Shia Inheritance Law Citation: Journal of Digital Islamicate Research 3, 1 (2025) ; 10.1163/27732363-20250002 Download Figure Download figure as PowerPoint slide While most of the information was accurate, comprehensive, and sufficiently explained, there was an incorrect statement regarding bequests. After describing the Sunni law of bequests, it stated, “Similarly, a person can only make a bequest for up to one-third of their estate. However, Shia law is generally stricter about invalidating any bequest that contradicts the rights of heirs.” This statement is both incorrect and ambiguous. It is wrong because, unlike Sunni law, Shia law allows bequest in favor of legal heirs (Abbasi and Cheema 2024, 283). The second sentence does not clarify how Shia law is “stricter” in invalidating “any bequest that contradicts the rights of heirs.” If the implication is that Shia law strictly disallows bequests in favor of legal heirs, then it is patently wrong. ChatGPT-4 also provided a comprehensive list of primary and secondary sources of Islamic inheritance law, including the classic textbooks such as Al-Hidayah (The Guidance) by Burhan al-Din al-Marghinani (Hanafi School) and Bidayat al-Mujtahid by Ibn Rushd (Comparative Sunni Jurisprudence) on Sunni law; and Sharh al-Lumʾah (The Radiance of Faith) by al-Shahid al-Thani (Jaʾfari School) and Islamic Laws by Ayatollah Abul-Qasim al-Khoei on Shia law. Other references included The Islamic Law of Inheritance by Hamid Khan (Oxford University Press, 2007). While all these references are authentic, one reference, “ Islamic Inheritance Law in Shia and Sunni Jurisprudence by Sayyid Muhammad Rizvi,” was fabricated. Although the author has written several books on Islamic law, he has not authored a book with this title. DeepSeek also generated a comprehensive list of references, which included leading textbooks of both Sunni and Shia schools, such as Al-Muwatta by Imam Malik, Al-Hidayah by Burhan al-Din al-Marghinani, Al-Umm by Imam Shafiʾi, Al-Mughni by Ibn Qudamah, and Jawahir al-Kalam by Muhammad Hasan al-Najafi. Unlike ChatGPT-4, DeepSeek did not fabricate any references. Overall, ChatGPT-4 scored the highest. The scores are shown in the following table: View Full Size Table 2 Citation: Journal of Digital Islamicate Research 3, 1 (2025) ; 10.1163/27732363-20250002 Download Figure Download figure as PowerPoint slide Question 2: Simple propositions that do not involve differences between Sunni and Shia laws Despite the above-mentioned differences, Sunni and Shia inheritance laws share several similarities, as the primary sources of both Sunni and Shia schools are the same – the Qurʾan and Sunnah (traditions of the Prophet Muhammad). The differences arise due to plural interpretations of these sources by Muslim jurists. To assess the information generated by AI models, I posed the following simple question: You are an expert in Islamic law, please provide an answer to this question: Please calculate the share in inheritance if a deceased person leaves behind a husband and a son under Sunni and Shia inheritance laws. Unsurprisingly, all four AI models (ChatGPT-4, DeepSeek, Gemini, and Co-Pilot) correctly stated the shares of the husband and son as 1/4 and 3/4, respectively. ChatGPT-4 provided the most comprehensive answer by identifying the relevant verse of the Qurʾan (Surah An-Nisa, 4:12) and cited the books as mentioned in the answer to the first question discussed above, including the fabricated reference to “ Islamic Inheritance Law in Shia and Sunni Jurisprudence by Sayyid Muhammad Rizvi.” Co-Pilot cited several sources, including a paper referred to in its answer to the first question. Most interestingly, it cited two online inheritance calculators: http://inheritancecalculator.net/ and https://almwareeth.com/islamic-inheritance-calculator , but did not identify the relevant verses of the Qurʾan or cite any book on Islamic inheritance law. Gemini did not provide any references for the information it generated. DeepSeek cited a verse of the Qurʾan (Surah An-Nisa, 4:12) along with Al-Hidayah, Al-Mughni, Jawahir al-Kalam , and Al-Masalik . The table below summarizes the scores of each GenAI model. View Full Size Table 3 Citation: Journal of Digital Islamicate Research 3, 1 (2025) ; 10.1163/27732363-20250002 Download Figure Download figure as PowerPoint slide Question 3: Slightly complex propositions on which Sunni and Shia schools differ, such as the inheritance rights of widows and daughters We posed the question: “You are an expert in Islamic law, please provide an answer to this question: Please calculate shares in inheritance if a deceased person leaves behind a wife, a daughter, and a brother under Sunni and Shia inheritance laws. Please provide references to your answer.” The four AI models provided partly accurate answers to this question. ChatGPT-4 and DeepSeek performed relatively better by correctly identifying the shares of each legal heir and highlighting the difference between Sunni and Shia inheritance laws, but both failed to specify that a widow under Shia law does not inherit the land (Abbasi 2024). ChatGPT succinctly summarized the key differences in the following table: View Full Size Table 4 Citation: Journal of Digital Islamicate Research 3, 1 (2025) ; 10.1163/27732363-20250002 Download Figure Download figure as PowerPoint slide ChatGPT-4 cited the relevant Qurʾanic verses and referred to the same books as mentioned in the previous two questions. DeepSeek cited Al-Muwatta by Imam Malik (Sunni) and Jawahir al-Kalam by Sheikh Muhammad Hasan al-Najafi (Shia). Co-Pilot correctly identified the shares under Sunni law but failed to do so under Shia law, which excludes brother(s) in the presence of daughter(s). Co-Pilot incorrectly allocated 3/8 of the share to the brother after allocating 1/8 to the wife and 1/4 to the daughter under Shia law. It did not explain why these shares were allocated to each legal heir. In references, it cited a few references, such as Lucy Carrol’s paper on Sunni law (Carrol 1983), but it did not cite any reference to Shia inheritance law. Gemini could not correctly identify the shares of each legal heir under both Sunni and Shia schools. It incorrectly stated the shares as follows: Sunni : Wife: 1/4; Daughter: 1/8; Brother: 3/8 Shia : Wife: 1/4; Daughter: 1/4; Brother: 1/2 A wife inherits 1/8 of the estate in the presence of a child (or children) and 1/4 when there are no children of the deceased. The daughter receives a 1/4 share if she is the only child. The shares of both the wife and daughter are prescribed in the Qurʾan in Surah An-Nisa (4:11–12). Under Sunni law, the brother receives the remaining share after the wife and daughter receive their prescribed shares. However, under Shia law, the brother does not receive any share in the presence of a daughter. Generally, all four AI models generated well-structured responses to this question. Below are the scores: View Full Size Table 5 Citation: Journal of Digital Islamicate Research 3, 1 (2025) ; 10.1163/27732363-20250002 Download Figure Download figure as PowerPoint slide Question 4: Moderately complex propositions that require readjustments of legal heirs after applying the general rules of Islamic inheritance law While the rules of Islamic inheritance law could be applied with mathematical precision, their strict application sometimes leads to unusual outcomes in exceptional circumstances. One such situation arises where uterine brothers receive a share, but full brothers are excluded because they are classified as residuaries, and in this particular situation, nothing remains for them to inherit. This scenario did not occur during the lifetime of the Prophet Muhammad, but it later came before the second Caliph, Umar bin Khattab. The full brothers who did not receive any share in inheritance approached Umar and argued: “Even if our father were a donkey ( ḥimār ) – a derogatory term implying uselessness – do we not still share the same mother as the deceased?” Umar accepted their reasoning and ruled that uterine and full brothers would share one-third of the estate. This decision by Umar is recognized by two Sunni schools, Mālikī and Shāfiʿī, but it is not accepted by the Ḥanafī and Ḥanbalī schools (Coulson 1971, 73–76). ChatGPT-4, Co-Pilot, and DeepSeek responded to this proposition according to the Ḥanafī and Ḥanbalī schools, while Gemini did not specify the shares of each legal heir. When prompted to revise their answer according to the Mālikī and Shafiʿi schools, ChatGPT-4 and DeepSeek still produced the same answers, despite citing the references to the authoritative books of both schools. On the Mālikī school, ChatGPT-4 provided a reference with exact page numbers of the authoritative book, Bidayat al-Mujtahid by Ibn Rushd in Volume 2, pages 307–330, along with the online link: Archive.org Bidayat al-Mujtahid. While the volume number is correct, the page numbers are incorrect. The exact page number on which this issue is discussed in this book is 419. DeepSeek provided a detailed list of classical textbooks of the Mālikī and Shāfiʿī schools, along with references to contemporary scholars, which included The Islamic Law of Inheritance by Dr. Hussain Hamid Hassan. However, this citation is fabricated, as the correct author of this title is Hamid Khan (Khan 2007). Gemini did not specify the shares of each legal heir on this question. Instead, it generated general statements such as “A common rule in Islamic inheritance law is that the husband is entitled to a fixed share, often 1/4 of the inheritance. The remaining portion is then divided among the parents and siblings. The siblings’ shares are typically determined based on their relationship to the deceased.” It did not provide any references either. As a result, its overall score is 0. The table below summarizes the overall scores of all three AI models: View Full Size Table 6 Citation: Journal of Digital Islamicate Research 3, 1 (2025) ; 10.1163/27732363-20250002 Download Figure Download figure as PowerPoint slide Question 5: Very complex propositions on which state-enforced laws in Muslim-majority states differ from classical Islamic inheritance law and have been subjected to judicial interpretation. I posed the following question to test the jurisdiction-specific legal information generated by AI models: Please calculate the share in inheritance if a deceased is survived by a son, and a deceased son’s daughter under Islamic inheritance law as applied in Iran, Pakistan, and Egypt. All four AI models failed to produce an accurate answer to this question. Notably, ChatGPT-4 provided the correct references to the relevant statute in Pakistan, the Muslim Family Laws Ordinance 1961, but failed to apply it accurately. It cited the wrong statute in Egypt, Law No. 77 of 1943, instead of the correct statute, Law No. 71 of 1946, also known as the compulsory bequest ( wasiyyat wajibah ), which grants orphaned grandchildren a share in the inheritance, up to one-third of the estate. 6 Interestingly, DeepSeek also cited the same wrong statute. It also reproduced the fabricated reference to a book on Islamic inheritance law as mentioned in the previous question. ChatGPT-4 generated the following table to summarize the inheritance shares: View Full Size Table 7 Citation: Journal of Digital Islamicate Research 3, 1 (2025) ; 10.1163/27732363-20250002 Download Figure Download figure as PowerPoint slide Under Shia law, as applied in Iran, a son’s daughter is excluded in the presence of a son, based on the rule that a nearer relative excludes remote relatives. In both Pakistan and Egypt, the legislatures reformed the classical rules of the Ḥanafī school to grant orphaned grandchildren a share in inheritance, but they adopted two different legal solutions. In Pakistan, the Muslim Family Laws Ordinance 1961 grants orphaned grandchildren the right of representation to inherit the share their parents would have received. 7 In contrast, Egyptian law provides that orphaned grandchildren are entitled to the share their parents would have received had they survived the propositus, but only up to a maximum of one-third of the estate (Fatima 2024; Cheema 2024, 2023). Co-Pilot incorrectly stated that in Iran, the son would receive two-thirds of the estate, and in Pakistan, the son would receive double the share of the granddaughter. However, it correctly specified the share of the granddaughter as 1/3 under Egyptian law. In references, it cited an article in Wikipedia on Islamic inheritance law and Hamid Khan’s book, The Islamic Law of Inheritance (Oxford University Press 2007). Co-Pilot did not explain how the shares were calculated. Its answer, however, was well structured. Therefore, while it received 0 marks on the Explainability parameter, it scored full marks 4/4 on the Structure of Information. Gemini generated a completely inaccurate answer by stating that in Iran, “the daughter would typically inherit an equal share to that of her father,” and in Pakistan and Egypt, “the daughter would typically inherit half the share of her father.” It did not identify the legal sources on which this information was based. Therefore, its overall score is 0. The overall score of each GenAI model on this question is as follows: View Full Size Table 8 Citation: Journal of Digital Islamicate Research 3, 1 (2025) ; 10.1163/27732363-20250002 Download Figure Download figure as PowerPoint slide 3.1 Overall Scores of ChatGPT-4, DeepSeek, Co-Pilot, and Gemini View Full Size Table 9 ChatGPT-4 Citation: Journal of Digital Islamicate Research 3, 1 (2025) ; 10.1163/27732363-20250002 Download Figure Download figure as PowerPoint slide View Full Size Table 10 DeepSeek Citation: Journal of Digital Islamicate Research 3, 1 (2025) ; 10.1163/27732363-20250002 Download Figure Download figure as PowerPoint slide View Full Size Table 11 Co-Pilot Citation: Journal of Digital Islamicate Research 3, 1 (2025) ; 10.1163/27732363-20250002 Download Figure Download figure as PowerPoint slide View Full Size Table 12 Gemini Citation: Journal of Digital Islamicate Research 3, 1 (2025) ; 10.1163/27732363-20250002 Download Figure Download figure as PowerPoint slide 3.2 Overall Scores of GenAI Models View Full Size Table 13 Citation: Journal of Digital Islamicate Research 3, 1 (2025) ; 10.1163/27732363-20250002 Download Figure Download figure as PowerPoint slide The chart below presents this data: View Full Size Chart 1 Comparison of GenAI models on various evaluation metrics Citation: Journal of Digital Islamicate Research 3, 1 (2025) ; 10.1163/27732363-20250002 Download Figure Download figure as PowerPoint slide Based on the analysis of the above results, we draw three main conclusions: ChatGPT-4 scored an overall 80.5% on the GenAI Evaluation Scale ( GAIES ), followed by a 77.5% score of DeepSeek. These scores are substantially higher than the medium score of Co-Pilot’s 61.5%, and the poor score of Gemini, which is only 35.5%. A cascading effect is evident across the spectrum from simple to complex propositions, as all four AI models scored relatively higher on simple propositions and lower on complex ones. Notably, all four AI models scored the lowest marks on the final proposition, which was the most complex and advanced, as it required jurisdiction-specific application of the rules of Islamic inheritance law. On the five parameters of the GenAI Evaluation Scale ( GAIES ), all four AI models scored the highest on the Structure of Information, Authenticity of References, and Comprehensiveness. Their scores were medium on the Explainability parameter. However, the overall score of each GenAI model on accuracy was minimal: only 32% by Gemini (6.5/20), 60% by DeepSeek and Co-Pilot (12/20), and 67.5% by ChatGPT-4 (13.5/20). Given the consistently low accuracy scores of all four AI models, significant concerns arise regarding the reliability of AI -generated content on Islamic inheritance law. The following section investigates the potential of Google’s NotebookLM to mitigate these challenges. 4 How Can GenAI Models Be Utilized for Islamic Legal Education and Scholarship? Google’s NotebookLM allows users to upload documents and generate answers with exact page references. We tested it by uploading Succession in the Muslim Family by Coulson (1971) and posed five questions, as outlined above and reproduced below in Appendix 1. It produced significantly more detailed responses than any of the four GenAI models previously discussed. For the first question, it identified thirteen differences between Sunni and Shia inheritance laws, compared to eight by ChatGPT, six by Gemini and DeepSeek, and only three by Co-Pilot. NotebookLM also provided more comprehensive answers to the second and third questions, which concerned the inheritance shares of a son and a husband, and of a wife, daughter, and brother under both Sunni and Shia laws. Most notably, while all four GenAI models failed to properly apply state- enforced reformed inheritance laws concerning orphaned grandchildren’s inheritance rights, NotebookLM correctly applied the statutory laws of Pakistan and Egypt. Even more impressive was NotebookLM’s 100% accuracy rate, all answers were directly sourced from the uploaded book and could be verified through the cited page references. This approach effectively addresses the hallucination problems that plague other GenAI models. However, NotebookLM has limitations (Yeo et al. 2025), particularly in terms of comprehensiveness. For instance, it failed to specify that under Shia law, a childless widow does not inherit land, despite Coulson’s discussion of this principle on pages 113–114. Similarly, in a scenario involving the inheritance rights of uterine brothers alongside full brothers, a husband, and a mother, it did not clarify that the Mālikī and Shāfiʿī schools allocate one-third of the estate to the uterine brothers. Coulson covers this issue in detail under the Himariyya ( Mushtaraka ) Rule on pages 73–76, but NotebookLM only provided this information when specifically prompted to address the issue under the Mālikī school. Based on the results arising out of the application of the GenAI Evaluation Scale ( GAIES ) to the information generated by multiple GenAI models, we propose the GenAI Application Scale ( GAIAS ) for students, teachers, scholars, and practitioners to effectively use AI models for generating information regarding Islamic inheritance law. We draw insights from the state-of-the-art literature on the integration of generative AI into legal education (Perkins 2024; Furze 2023 and 2024; Kılınç 2024), as well as our experience of learning, teaching, and researching Islamic inheritance law for several decades at multiple law schools across several jurisdictions. The GenAI Application Scale ( GAIAS ) is proposed as a general standard for integrating GenAI into Islamic legal education and scholarship. While its focus is specific to Islamic inheritance law, it has the potential to extend to other areas of Islamic law. The Scale provides general guidelines for using GenAI models for learning, teaching, researching, and applying the rules of Islamic inheritance law by underscoring their utility while identifying the potential risks of such use. 1. Full Use of GenAI as Research Assistant Our evaluation of AI -generated information shows that AI models facilitate the generation of structured and comprehensive information and provide references to primary and secondary sources of Islamic law. All three models scored the highest on the Structure of Information parameter, with ChatGPT-4 and DeepSeek scoring 100%, Co-Pilot 95% (19/20), and Gemini 60% (12/20). However, all references need to be verified, as the score on the Authenticity of References parameter was low: only 5% for Gemini (1/20), 67.5% for Co-Pilot (13.5/20), and relatively better 77.5% for ChatGPT-4 (15.5/20), and 85% DeepSeek (17/20). 2. Partial Use of GenAI Subject to Human Evaluation At this level, GenAI could be used to develop basic understanding of the structure of the legal rules of Islamic inheritance law, e.g., the categories and classes of legal heirs but still subject to human evaluation and supervision as all four GenAI models tend to present relevant information in a confident and convincing tone supported by fabricated references which appear authentic (Wachter et al. 2024). For instance, in response to question number 5 above, ChatGPT-4 incorrectly stated that orphaned grandchildren do not inherit in the presence of a son of the deceased (their paternal uncle), despite citing the correct statute, the Muslim Family Laws Ordinance 1961, applicable in Pakistan. Similarly, it wrongly stated that orphaned grandchildren do not inherit under Egyptian law in the presence of their uncle and provided an incorrect citation to Law No. 77 of 1943 instead of the correct statute, Law No. 71 of 1946, which grants orphaned grandchildren a share in the inheritance, up to one-third of the estate. 3. Minimal Use of GenAI In their current state, GenAI models lack the capacity to provide correct answers related to legal issues on Islamic inheritance law, particularly where there are subtle differences between various schools of Sunni and Shia jurisprudence. The evaluation of the AI -generated information revealed that, despite citing the correct sources, which state the different rules of various schools of Sunni jurisprudence, AI models failed to provide accurate information. For instance, in its response to question 4 above, ChatGPT-4 cited the translation of the authoritative textbook, Bidāyat al-Mujtāhid (Jurist’s Primer) by Ibn Rushd, which describes the different rules of Islamic inheritance law as elaborated by the jurists of various Sunni schools, but still failed to provide the correct information. 4. No Use of GenAI We found that all four GenAI models could not choose the preferred opinion amongst multiple juristic views or identify the binding legal authority where there were multiple judgments regarding the interpretation of particular statutes. Although large language models are advanced artificial intelligence systems trained on vast amounts of text data to generate human-like text, they lack the capacity to make judgments as humans do (Murray 2024). 8 As a result, in the above five questions, none of the GenAI models could identify the preferred juristic view on the contentious areas of Islamic inheritance law, e.g., inheritance rights of uterine brothers and full brothers. 5. Ban on GenAI Use GenAI must not be used to generate information that is unethical or illegal. For instance, it must not be used to fabricate sources that resemble the primary sources of Islamic law, the Qurʾan and Sunnah (sayings and traditions of the Prophet Muhammad). When I asked ChatGPT-4 to advise on how to disinherit daughters and their children under Islamic inheritance law, it identified the legal mechanisms such as gifts ( hibah ), wills, and voluntary relinquishment of shares by daughters and their children. Still, it stated, “While Sharia provides clear guidelines that daughters must receive a share of the inheritance, there are some permissible methods (like hibah [gifts]) that may allow for some adjustments during one’s lifetime. However, it is critical to ensure that such actions do not violate Islamic law’s ethical and legal framework.” This response demonstrates that GenAI models have some built-in safeguards against unethical use of the information that they generate. Still, caution must be exercised to ensure that the rights and interests of the legal heirs under Islamic inheritance law are not compromised due to AI -generated information. View Full Size GenAI Application Scale ( GAIAS ) Citation: Journal of Digital Islamicate Research 3, 1 (2025) ; 10.1163/27732363-20250002 Download Figure Download figure as PowerPoint slide The above Scale is developed to facilitate the integration of GenAI into Islamic legal education, research, and practice. A review of literature on the use of GenAI in higher education reveals positive outcomes from integrating GenAI models, including ChatGPT-4, as an aid in teaching and learning (Bliss 2024; İpek 2023; Ajevski 2023; Rawas 2024). Empirical research indicates that personalized chatbot interactions can foster critical thinking, promote active learning, enhance student engagement, and add innovation to pedagogical techniques in education (Chong-Lem 2024; Tlili et al. 2023; Dai et al. 2023; Memarian and Doleck 2023). Simultaneously, concerns have been raised regarding potential overreliance on GenAI models, the production of misinformation, the lack of trustworthiness of AI -generated information, and the erosion of academic rigor (Giannakos 2024; Cotton et al. 2024; Mogavi 2024; Eke 2023). 5 Conclusion The findings of this study underscore the potential of GenAI models like ChatGPT-4, DeepSeek, and NotebookLM to transform Islamic legal education and scholarship, particularly in the domain of inheritance law. These tools can significantly enhance students’ learning experience and reduce the time required for conducting legal research by synthesizing information and offering clear, structured responses to complex legal queries. However, their current limitations, particularly regarding the accurate citation of sources, understanding of state-specific statutory laws, and susceptibility to generating false information, highlight the necessity for human oversight. While GenAI models offer substantial support to Islamic law students and scholars by aiding in interpreting intricate jurisprudential texts and facilitating the comparison of diverse schools of thought, they are not yet equipped to replace traditional scholars. The authority of Islamic law teachers, experts, and jurists remains grounded in attributes such as piety, dedication to the pursuit of truth, and intellectual rigor – qualities that GenAI models cannot replicate. The complexity and diversity of Islamic jurisprudence, particularly in inheritance matters, require nuanced understanding and meticulous reasoning that GenAI models are not yet capable of replicating. Although GenAI models like ChatGPT-4 have made notable progress in mastering aspects of Islamic inheritance law, the GenAI Evaluation Scale ( GAIES ) used in this study reveals that significant improvements are still required, particularly in terms of accuracy, source validation, and adaptation to local legal reforms. Until these issues are addressed, GenAI should be viewed as a supplementary tool that enhances and augments, rather than replaces, the expertise of human scholars and jurists in Islamic law (Ghaly 2023). This study introduces the GenAI Application Scale ( GAIAS ) to guide the effective and efficient use of AI models in Islamic legal education, learning, and research. The objective of this Scale is to serve as a guide for students, teachers, practitioners, and scholars of Islamic inheritance law to make the best use of GenAI models without falling into the trap of falsified information, which is presented in a confident and authoritative tone. Acknowledgement I am grateful to Prof. Dr. Shahbaz Ahmad Cheema for his valuable comments on earlier drafts of this paper. I would also like to thank Simra Sohail, Faisal Sattar, and Adeel Hassan for their excellent research assistance. Appendix 1: Prompts You are an expert in Islamic law, please provide an answer to this question: 9 What are the differences between Sunni and Shia schools regarding Islamic inheritance law? Please provide references to your answer. You are an expert in Islamic law, please provide an answer to this question: Please calculate shares in inheritance if a deceased person leaves behind a husband and a son under Sunni and Shia inheritance laws. Please provide references to your answer. You are an expert in Islamic law, please provide an answer to this question: Please calculate shares in inheritance if a deceased person leaves behind a wife, a daughter, and a brother under Sunni and Shia inheritance laws. Please provide references to your answer. You are an expert in Islamic law, please provide an answer to this question: Please calculate shares in inheritance if a deceased leaves behind a husband, a mother, two uterine brothers, and two full brothers. Please provide references to your answer. You are an expert in Islamic law, please provide an answer to this question: Please calculate shares in inheritance if a deceased is survived by a son, and a deceased son’s daughter under Islamic inheritance law as applied in Iran, Pakistan, and Egypt. Please provide references to your answer. Bibliography Abbasi , M. Z. 2024 . “ Fluidity of Sharīʾa and the Modern State: Inheritance Rights of Childless Widows under Shīʿa Personal Law in British India and Pakistan .” Yearbook of Islamic and Middle Eastern Law 23 ( 1 ): 233 – 263 . Abbasi , M. Z. 2024 . “ Fluidity of Sharīʾa and the Modern State: Inheritance Rights of Childless Widows under Shīʿa Personal Law in British India and Pakistan .” Yearbook of Islamic and Middle Eastern Law 23 ( 1 ): 233 – 263 . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Abbasi , M. Z. and Cheema , S. A. 2024 . Family Laws in Pakistan . Karachi : Oxford University Press . Abbasi , M. Z. and Cheema , S. A. 2024 . Family Laws in Pakistan. Karachi : Oxford University Press . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Ajevski , Marjan , Kim Barker , Andrew Gilbert , Liz Hardie , and Francine Ryan . 2023 . “ ChatGPT and the Future of Legal Education and Practice .” The Law Teacher 57 ( 3 ): 352 – 364 . Ajevski , Marjan , Kim Barker , Andrew Gilbert , Liz Hardie , and Francine Ryan . 2023 . “ ChatGPT and the Future of Legal Education and Practice .” The Law Teacher 57 ( 3 ): 352 – 364 . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Al-Khoei , Ayatollah Abul-Qasim . 1999 . Islamic Laws . Qom : Ansariyan Publications . Al-Khoei , Ayatollah Abul-Qasim . 1999 . Islamic Laws. Qom : Ansariyan Publications . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Al-Marghinani , Burhan al-Din . 1957 . Al-Hidayah (The Guidance) , translated by Charles Hamilton . Lahore : Premier Book House . Al-Marghinani , Burhan al-Din . 1957 . Al-Hidayah (The Guidance), translated by Charles Hamilton . Lahore : Premier Book House . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Al-Shahid al-Thani . 1994 . Sharh al-Lumʾah (The Radiance of Faith) . Beirut : Dar al-Kutub al-Ilmiyya . Al-Shahid al-Thani . 1994 . Sharh al-Lumʾah (The Radiance of Faith). Beirut : Dar al-Kutub al-Ilmiyya . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Bhojani , Ali-Reza , and Marcus Schwarting . 2023 . “ Truth and regret: Large language models, the Qurʾan, and misinformation .” Theology and Science 21 ( 4 ): 557 – 563 . Bhojani , Ali-Reza , and Marcus Schwarting . 2023 . “ Truth and regret: Large language models, the Qurʾan, and misinformation .” Theology and Science 21 ( 4 ): 557 – 563 . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Bliss , John . 2024 . “ Teaching Law in the Age of Generative AI .” Jurimetrics 64 ( 2 ): 111 – 161 . Bliss , John . 2024 . “ Teaching Law in the Age of Generative AI .” Jurimetrics 64 ( 2 ): 111 – 161 . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Bubeck , S. , Chandrasekaran , V. , Eldan , R. , Gehrke , J. , Horvitz , E. , Kamar , E. , Lee , P. , Lee , Y. T. , Li , Y. , Lundberg , S. , Nori , H. , Palangi , H. , Ribeiro , M. T. , and Zhang , Y. 2023 . “ Sparks of Artificial General Intelligence: Early experiments with GPT-4 .” ArXiv . https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.12712 ( accessed 30 May 2025 ). Bubeck , S. , Chandrasekaran , V. , Eldan , R. , Gehrke , J. , Horvitz , E. , Kamar , E. , Lee , P. , Lee , Y. T. , Li , Y. , Lundberg , S. , Nori , H. , Palangi , H. , Ribeiro , M. T. , and Zhang , Y. 2023 . “ Sparks of Artificial General Intelligence: Early experiments with GPT-4 .” ArXiv. https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.12712 ( accessed 30 May 2025 ). )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Budhiraja , Gurneet Singh . 2022 . “ Inheritance under Shia Law: Principles and its Analysis .” Indian Journal of Integrated Research in Law 3 ( 1 ): 1 – 10 . Budhiraja , Gurneet Singh . 2022 . “ Inheritance under Shia Law: Principles and its Analysis .” Indian Journal of Integrated Research in Law 3 ( 1 ): 1 – 10 . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Calder , Norman . 2010 . Introduction to Islamic Law . Edinburgh : Edinburgh University Press . Calder , Norman . 2010 . Introduction to Islamic Law. Edinburgh : Edinburgh University Press . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Carroll , Lucy . 1983 . “ The Hanafi Law of Intestate Succession: A Simplified Approach .” Modern Asian Studies 17 ( 4 ): 629 – 670 . Carroll , Lucy . 1983 . “ The Hanafi Law of Intestate Succession: A Simplified Approach .” Modern Asian Studies 17 ( 4 ): 629 – 670 . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Carroll , Lucy . 1995 . “ Application of the Islamic Law of Succession: Was the Propositus a Sunnī or a Shī˓ī? .” Islamic Law and Society : 24 – 42 . Carroll , Lucy . 1995 . “ Application of the Islamic Law of Succession: Was the Propositus a Sunnī or a Shī˓ī? .” Islamic Law and Society: 24 – 42 . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Chaudhary , Yaqub . 2024 . “ Islam and artificial intelligence .” The Cambridge Companion to Religion and Artificial Intelligence . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . 109 – 130 . Chaudhary , Yaqub . 2024 . “ Islam and artificial intelligence .” The Cambridge Companion to Religion and Artificial Intelligence. Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . 109 – 130 . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Cheema , S. A. 2012 . “ Shia and Sunni Laws of Inheritance: A Comparative Analysis .” Pakistan Journal of Islamic Research 10 : 69 – 82 . Cheema , S. A. 2012 . “ Shia and Sunni Laws of Inheritance: A Comparative Analysis .” Pakistan Journal of Islamic Research 10 : 69 – 82 . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Cheema , S. A. 2021 . “ Distribution of inheritance under Islamic law: An appraisal of online inheritance calculators .” Journal of Islamic Thought and Civilization 11 ( 1 ): 112 – 131 . Cheema , S. A. 2021 . “ Distribution of inheritance under Islamic law: An appraisal of online inheritance calculators .” Journal of Islamic Thought and Civilization 11 ( 1 ): 112 – 131 . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Cheema , S. A. 2023 . “ Section 4 of Pakistan’s Muslim Family Laws Ordinance, 1961: An Exploration of Interpretive Tensions .” Manchester Journal of Transnational Islamic Law &amp; Practice 19 ( 2 ): 2 – 19 . Cheema , S. A. 2023 . “ Section 4 of Pakistan’s Muslim Family Laws Ordinance, 1961: An Exploration of Interpretive Tensions .” Manchester Journal of Transnational Islamic Law &amp; Practice 19 ( 2 ): 2 – 19 . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Cheema , S. A. 2024 . “ Reappraisal of Lucy Carroll’s Tripartite Thesis on Section 4 of Pakistan’s Muslim Family Laws Ordinance 1961 .” Manchester Journal of Transnational Islamic Law &amp; Practice 20 ( 2 ): 1 – 16 . Cheema , S. A. 2024 . “ Reappraisal of Lucy Carroll’s Tripartite Thesis on Section 4 of Pakistan’s Muslim Family Laws Ordinance 1961 .” Manchester Journal of Transnational Islamic Law &amp; Practice 20 ( 2 ): 1 – 16 . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Choi , J. H. and Schwarcz , Daniel . 2025 . “ AI Assistance in Legal Analysis: An Empirical Study .” Journal of Legal Education 73 ( 2 ): 385 – 420 . Choi , J. H. and Schwarcz , Daniel . 2025 . “ AI Assistance in Legal Analysis: An Empirical Study .” Journal of Legal Education 73 ( 2 ): 385 – 420 . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Cong-Lem , N. , Soyoof , A. , and Tsering , D. 2024 . “ A Systematic Review of the Limitations and Associated Opportunities of ChatGPT .” International Journal of Human– Computer Interaction , 41 ( 7 ), 3851 – 3866 . Cong-Lem , N. , Soyoof , A. , and Tsering , D. 2024 . “ A Systematic Review of the Limitations and Associated Opportunities of ChatGPT .” International Journal of Human– Computer Interaction, 41 ( 7 ), 3851 – 3866 . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Cotton , D. R. , P. A. Cotton , and J. R. Shipway . 2024 . “ Chatting and Cheating: Ensuring Academic Integrity in the Era of ChatGPT .” Innovations in Education and Teaching International 61 ( 2 ): 228 – 239 . Cotton , D. R. , P. A. Cotton , and J. R. Shipway . 2024 . “ Chatting and Cheating: Ensuring Academic Integrity in the Era of ChatGPT .” Innovations in Education and Teaching International 61 ( 2 ): 228 – 239 . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Coulson , Noel James . 1971 . Succession in the Muslim Family . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . Coulson , Noel James . 1971 . Succession in the Muslim Family. Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Dai , Yun , Ang Liu , and Cher Ping Lim . 2023 . “ Reconceptualizing ChatGPT and generative AI as a student-driven innovation in higher education .” Procedia CIRP 119 ( 2023 ): 84 – 90 . Dai , Yun , Ang Liu , and Cher Ping Lim . 2023 . “ Reconceptualizing ChatGPT and generative AI as a student-driven innovation in higher education .” Procedia CIRP 119 ( 2023 ): 84 – 90 . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Edwards , Benj . 2025 . Why ChatGPT and Bing Chat are So Good at Making Things Up: A Look Inside the Hallucinating Artificial Minds of the Famous Text Prediction Bots . ars technica , April 6, 2023. 2023, https://arstechnica.com/information-technology/2023/04/why-ai-chatbots-are-the-ultimate-bs-machines-and-how-people-hope-to-fix-them/ ( accessed 1 June 2025 ). Edwards , Benj . 2025 . Why ChatGPT and Bing Chat are So Good at Making Things Up: A Look Inside the Hallucinating Artificial Minds of the Famous Text Prediction Bots . ars technica, April 6, 2023. 2023, https://arstechnica.com/information-technology/2023/04/why-ai-chatbots-are-the-ultimate-bs-machines-and-how-people-hope-to-fix-them/ ( accessed 1 June 2025 ). )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Eke , D. O. 2023 . “ ChatGPT and the Rise of Generative AI : Threat to Academic Integrity? ” Journal of Responsible Technology 13 : 100060 . Eke , D. O. 2023 . “ ChatGPT and the Rise of Generative AI : Threat to Academic Integrity? ” Journal of Responsible Technology 13 : 100060 . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Fatima , Haseeb . 2024 . “ A Critical Appraisal of Obligatory Bequest as Prevalent in Muslim Countries .” Islamic Studies 63 ( 2 ): 213 – 240 . Fatima , Haseeb . 2024 . “ A Critical Appraisal of Obligatory Bequest as Prevalent in Muslim Countries .” Islamic Studies 63 ( 2 ): 213 – 240 . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Furze , Leon , Mike Perkins , Jasper Roe , and Jason MacVaugh . 2024 . “ The AI Assessment Scale ( AIAS ) in action: A pilot implementation of GenAI-supported assessment .” Australasian Journal of Educational Technology 40 ( 4 ): 38 – 55 . Furze , Leon , Mike Perkins , Jasper Roe , and Jason MacVaugh . 2024 . “ The AI Assessment Scale ( AIAS ) in action: A pilot implementation of GenAI-supported assessment .” Australasian Journal of Educational Technology 40 ( 4 ): 38 – 55 . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Fyzee , Asaf A. A. 2008 . Outlines of Muhammadan Law . 5th ed. Oxford : Oxford University Press . Fyzee , Asaf A. A. 2008 . Outlines of Muhammadan Law. 5th ed. Oxford : Oxford University Press . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Ghaly , Mohammed . 2024 . “ What Makes Work ‘Good’ in the Age of Artificial Intelligence ( AI )? Islamic Perspectives on AI -Mediated Work Ethics .” The Journal of Ethics 28 ( 3 ): 429 – 453 . Ghaly , Mohammed . 2024 . “ What Makes Work ‘Good’ in the Age of Artificial Intelligence ( AI )? Islamic Perspectives on AI -Mediated Work Ethics .” The Journal of Ethics 28 ( 3 ): 429 – 453 . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Giannakos , Michail , Roger Azevedo , Peter Brusilovsky , Mutlu Cukurova , Yannis Dimitriadis , Davinia Hernandez-Leo , Sanna Järvelä , Manolis Mavrikis , and Bart Rienties . 2024 . “ The promise and challenges of generative AI in education .” Behaviour &amp; Information Technology : 1 – 27 . Giannakos , Michail , Roger Azevedo , Peter Brusilovsky , Mutlu Cukurova , Yannis Dimitriadis , Davinia Hernandez-Leo , Sanna Järvelä , Manolis Mavrikis , and Bart Rienties . 2024 . “ The promise and challenges of generative AI in education .” Behaviour &amp; Information Technology: 1 – 27 . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Hicks , Michael Townsen , James Humphries , and Joe Slater . 2024 . “ ChatGPT is bullshit .” Ethics and Information Technology 26 ( 2 ): 1 – 10 . Hicks , Michael Townsen , James Humphries , and Joe Slater . 2024 . “ ChatGPT is bullshit .” Ethics and Information Technology 26 ( 2 ): 1 – 10 . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Ibn Rushd . 1996 . Bidayat al-Mujtahid wa Nihayat al-Muqtasid (The Distinguished Jurist’s Primer) . Translated by Imran Ahsan Khan Nyazee . Reading : Garnet Publishing . Ibn Rushd . 1996 . Bidayat al-Mujtahid wa Nihayat al-Muqtasid (The Distinguished Jurist’s Primer). Translated by Imran Ahsan Khan Nyazee . Reading : Garnet Publishing . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation İpek , Ziyaeddin Halid , Ali Ibrahim Can Gözüm , Stamatios Papadakis , and Michail Kallogiannakis . 2023 . “ Educational Applications of the ChatGPT AI System: A Systematic Review Research .” Educational Process: International Journal 12 ( 3 ): 26 – 55 . İpek , Ziyaeddin Halid , Ali Ibrahim Can Gözüm , Stamatios Papadakis , and Michail Kallogiannakis . 2023 . “ Educational Applications of the ChatGPT AI System: A Systematic Review Research .” Educational Process: International Journal 12 ( 3 ): 26 – 55 . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Ji , Ziwei , Nayeon Lee , Rita Frieske , Tiezheng Yu , Dan Su , Yan Xu , Etsuko Ishii , Ye Jin Bang , Andrea Madotto , and Pascale Fung . 2023 . “ Survey of hallucination in natural language generation .” ACM computing surveys 55 ( 12 ): 1 – 38 . Ji , Ziwei , Nayeon Lee , Rita Frieske , Tiezheng Yu , Dan Su , Yan Xu , Etsuko Ishii , Ye Jin Bang , Andrea Madotto , and Pascale Fung . 2023 . “ Survey of hallucination in natural language generation .” ACM computing surveys 55 ( 12 ): 1 – 38 . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Khan , Hamid . 2007 . The Islamic Law of Inheritance . Oxford : Oxford University Press . Khan , Hamid . 2007 . The Islamic Law of Inheritance. Oxford : Oxford University Press . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Kidd , Celeste , and Abeba Birhane . 2023 . “ How AI can distort human beliefs .” Science 380 ( 6651 ): 1222 – 1223 . Kidd , Celeste , and Abeba Birhane . 2023 . “ How AI can distort human beliefs .” Science 380 ( 6651 ): 1222 – 1223 . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Kılınç , Selçuk . 2024 . “ Comprehensive AI assessment framework: Enhancing educational evaluation with ethical AI integration .” Journal of Educational Technology and Online Learning 7 ( 4 ) ICETOL 2024 Special Issue 521 – 540 . Kılınç , Selçuk . 2024 . “ Comprehensive AI assessment framework: Enhancing educational evaluation with ethical AI integration .” Journal of Educational Technology and Online Learning 7 ( 4 ) ICETOL 2024 Special Issue 521 – 540 . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Maghniyyah , Muhammad Jawad . 1997 . Shia Law . Beirut : Dar al-Ilm . Maghniyyah , Muhammad Jawad . 1997 . Shia Law. Beirut : Dar al-Ilm . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Mahmood , Tahir . 1985 . Islamic Law and Contemporary Legal Issues . New Delhi : Indian Law Institute . Mahmood , Tahir . 1985 . Islamic Law and Contemporary Legal Issues. New Delhi : Indian Law Institute . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Malik , Shoaib Ahmed . 2023 . “ Artificial Intelligence and Islamic Thought: Two Distinctive Challenges .” Journal of Islamic and Muslim Studies 8 ( 2 ): 108 – 115 . Malik , Shoaib Ahmed . 2023 . “ Artificial Intelligence and Islamic Thought: Two Distinctive Challenges .” Journal of Islamic and Muslim Studies 8 ( 2 ): 108 – 115 . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Memarian , Bahar , and Tenzin Doleck . 2023 . “ ChatGPT in education: Methods, potentials, and limitations .” Computers in Human Behavior: Artificial Humans 1 ( 2 ): 100022 . Memarian , Bahar , and Tenzin Doleck . 2023 . “ ChatGPT in education: Methods, potentials, and limitations .” Computers in Human Behavior: Artificial Humans 1 ( 2 ): 100022 . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Microsoft Research . March 2023 . “ Sparks of Artificial General Intelligence: Early Experiments with GPT-4 .” arXiv Preprint . https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.12712 . Microsoft Research . March 2023 . “ Sparks of Artificial General Intelligence: Early Experiments with GPT-4 .” arXiv Preprint. https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.12712 . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Mogavi , Reza Hadi , Chao Deng , Justin Juho Kim , Pengyuan Zhou , Young D. Kwon , Ahmed Hosny Saleh Metwally , Ahmed Tlili et al. 2024 . “ ChatGPT in education: A blessing or a curse? A qualitative study exploring early adopters’ utilization and perceptions .” Computers in Human Behavior: Artificial Humans 2 ( 1 ): 100027 . Mogavi , Reza Hadi , Chao Deng , Justin Juho Kim , Pengyuan Zhou , Young D. Kwon , Ahmed Hosny Saleh Metwally , Ahmed Tlili et al. 2024 . “ ChatGPT in education: A blessing or a curse? A qualitative study exploring early adopters’ utilization and perceptions .” Computers in Human Behavior: Artificial Humans 2 ( 1 ): 100027 . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Munn , L. , Magee , L. , and Arora , V. 2023 . “ Truth machines: synthesizing veracity in AI language models .” AI &amp; society : 1 – 15 . Munn , L. , Magee , L. , and Arora , V. 2023 . “ Truth machines: synthesizing veracity in AI language models .” AI &amp; society: 1 – 15 . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation OpenAI . 2023 . GPT-4 Technical Report . San Francisco : OpenAI . OpenAI . 2023 . GPT-4 Technical Report. San Francisco : OpenAI . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Perkins , Mike , Leon Furze , Jasper Roe , and Jason MacVaugh . 2023 . “ Navigating the generative AI era: Introducing the AI assessment scale for ethical GenAI assessment .” (arXiv: 2312.07086) . arXiv . Perkins , Mike , Leon Furze , Jasper Roe , and Jason MacVaugh . 2023 . “ Navigating the generative AI era: Introducing the AI assessment scale for ethical GenAI assessment .” (arXiv: 2312.07086). arXiv . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Perkins , Mike , Leon Furze , Jasper Roe , and Jason MacVaugh . 2024 . “ The Artificial Intelligence Assessment Scale ( AIAS ): A framework for ethical integration of generative AI in educational assessment .” Journal of University Teaching and Learning Practice 21 ( 6 ): 49 – 66 . Perkins , Mike , Leon Furze , Jasper Roe , and Jason MacVaugh . 2024 . “ The Artificial Intelligence Assessment Scale ( AIAS ): A framework for ethical integration of generative AI in educational assessment .” Journal of University Teaching and Learning Practice 21 ( 6 ): 49 – 66 . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Qadir , Junaid , and Recep Senturk . 2024 . “ Educating for the AI Era: Harnessing the Wild GenAI Horse through Multiplex AI Humanities and Critical AI Literacy .” Available at SSRN 5015109 . Qadir , Junaid , and Recep Senturk . 2024 . “ Educating for the AI Era: Harnessing the Wild GenAI Horse through Multiplex AI Humanities and Critical AI Literacy .” Available at SSRN 5015109. )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Rabb , Intisar . ( 2025 ). “ The Book and AI , Part 2: Testing AI Research Agents for Islamic Law ,” Islamic Law Blog , March 21, 2025, https://islamiclaw.blog/2025/03/21/roundtable-the-book-and-ai-part-2-testing-ai-research-agents-for-islamic-law/ ( accessed 1 June 2025 ). Rabb , Intisar . ( 2025 ). “ The Book and AI , Part 2: Testing AI Research Agents for Islamic Law ,” Islamic Law Blog, March 21, 2025, https://islamiclaw.blog/2025/03/21/roundtable-the-book-and-ai-part-2-testing-ai-research-agents-for-islamic-law/ ( accessed 1 June 2025 ). )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Rawas , S. 2024 . “ ChatGPT: Empowering Lifelong Learning in the Digital Age of Higher Education .” Education and Information Technologies 29 ( 6 ): 6895 – 6908 . Rawas , S. 2024 . “ ChatGPT: Empowering Lifelong Learning in the Digital Age of Higher Education .” Education and Information Technologies 29 ( 6 ): 6895 – 6908 . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Rizvi , Sayyid Muhammad . 2005 . Islamic Inheritance Law in Shia and Sunni Jurisprudence . Toronto : Islamic Publishing House . Rizvi , Sayyid Muhammad . 2005 . Islamic Inheritance Law in Shia and Sunni Jurisprudence. Toronto : Islamic Publishing House . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Shanahan , Murray . 2024 . “ Talking about large language models .” Communications of the ACM 67 ( 2 ): 68 – 79 . Shanahan , Murray . 2024 . “ Talking about large language models .” Communications of the ACM 67 ( 2 ): 68 – 79 . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Susskind , Richard . 2025 . How To Think About AI : A Guide For The Perplexed . Oxford : Oxford University Press . Susskind , Richard . 2025 . How To Think About AI : A Guide For The Perplexed. Oxford : Oxford University Press . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Tahir , Muhammad . 2022 . “ Gender and Inheritance in Islamic Law: A Comparative Study .” Journal of Islamic Legal Studies 15 ( 2 ): 89 – 112 . Tahir , Muhammad . 2022 . “ Gender and Inheritance in Islamic Law: A Comparative Study .” Journal of Islamic Legal Studies 15 ( 2 ): 89 – 112 . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Tlili , A. , B. Shehata , M. A. Adarkwah , A. Bozkurt , D. T. Hickey , R. Huang , and B. Agyemang . 2023 . “ What If the Devil Is My Guardian Angel: ChatGPT as a Case Study of Using Chatbots in Education .” Smart Learning Environments 10 ( 1 ): 15 . Tlili , A. , B. Shehata , M. A. Adarkwah , A. Bozkurt , D. T. Hickey , R. Huang , and B. Agyemang . 2023 . “ What If the Devil Is My Guardian Angel: ChatGPT as a Case Study of Using Chatbots in Education .” Smart Learning Environments 10 ( 1 ): 15 . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Wachter , Sandra , Brent Mittelstadt , and Chris Russell . 2024 . “ Do large language models have a legal duty to tell the truth? .” Royal Society Open Science 11 ( 8 ): 240197 . Wachter , Sandra , Brent Mittelstadt , and Chris Russell . 2024 . “ Do large language models have a legal duty to tell the truth? .” Royal Society Open Science 11 ( 8 ): 240197 . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation White , Jules , Quchen Fu , Sam Hays , Michael Sandborn , Carlos Olea , Henry Gilbert , Ashraf Elnashar , Jesse Spencer-Smith , and Douglas C. Schmidt . 2023 . “ A prompt pattern catalog to enhance prompt engineering with ChatGPT .” arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.11382 . White , Jules , Quchen Fu , Sam Hays , Michael Sandborn , Carlos Olea , Henry Gilbert , Ashraf Elnashar , Jesse Spencer-Smith , and Douglas C. Schmidt . 2023 . “ A prompt pattern catalog to enhance prompt engineering with ChatGPT .” arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.11382. )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Wooldridge , Michael . 2021 . A Brief History of Artificial Intelligence: What It Is, Where We Are, and Where We Are Going . New York : Flatiron Books . Wooldridge , Michael . 2021 . A Brief History of Artificial Intelligence: What It Is, Where We Are, and Where We Are Going. New York : Flatiron Books . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Yeo , Marie Alina , Benjamin Luke Moorhouse , and Yuwei Wan . 2025 . “ From Academic Text to Talk-Show: Deepening Engagement and Understanding with Google NotebookLM .” TESL-EJ 28 ( 4 ) https://doi.org/10.55593/ej.28112int ( accessed 30 May 2025 ). Yeo , Marie Alina , Benjamin Luke Moorhouse , and Yuwei Wan . 2025 . “ From Academic Text to Talk-Show: Deepening Engagement and Understanding with Google NotebookLM .” TESL-EJ 28 ( 4 ) https://doi.org/10.55593/ej.28112int ( accessed 30 May 2025 ). )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation Zaman , Muhammad Qasim . 2002 . The Ulama in Contemporary Islam: Custodians of Change . New York : Princeton University Press . Zaman , Muhammad Qasim . 2002 . The Ulama in Contemporary Islam: Custodians of Change. New York : Princeton University Press . )| false Search Google Scholar Export Citation 1 Edwards (2023) borrows the term “confabulation” from psychology to describe the phenomenon of GenAI making mistakes. He explains that confabulation “occurs when someone’s memory has a gap and the brain convincingly fills in the rest without intending to deceive others.” Other scholars (Hicks et al. 2024) argue that the terms “hallucinations” and “confabulation” anthropomorphize large language models and must be avoided. 2 The limited empirical research on students’ use of GPT-4 suggests caution as one study of GPT-4 assistance of students in law school exams found large variation in the effect of AI assistance, with the worst-performing students seeing the largest gains while the best-performing students seeing declines in their performance (Choi and Schwarcz 2025). 3 For example, if a woman dies and her husband and two sisters are legal heirs. The Quraʾnically prescribed share of the husband is 1/2 and that of sister’s is 2/3. The shares of each legal heir are calculated based on the least common multiple, which is 6 (2 multiplied by 3). The husband is entitled to 3/6 and sisters to 4/6. The collective share of legal heirs are 4 + 3 (7), which is higher than the actual number of 6 shares. Under Shia law, the share of sisters is reduced to 4/6, whereas under Sunni law, the shares of both husband and sisters are reduced. The husband receives 3/7 and sisters 4/7 (Abbasi and Cheema 2024, 339). 4 Nadjma Yassari, “Intestate Succession in Islamic Countries,” in Comparative Succession Law: Volume II : Intestate Succession , ed. Kenneth Reid, Marius de Waal, and Reinhard Zimmermann (Oxford University Press, 2015), 435. 5 Abbasi and Cheema, Family Laws in Pakistan , 332. 6 In one annotation by a different annotator, it explained “Egyptian Law of Inheritance (Law No. 77 of 1943, amended 1946)”. 7 “Succession. In the event of the death of any son or daughter of the propositus before the opening of succession, the children of such son or daughter, if any, living at the time the succession opens, shall per stripes receive a share equivalent to the share which such son or daughter, as the case may be, would have received if alive.” The Muslim Family Laws Ordinance, 1961, section 4. 8 Murray argues that while it is tempting to anthropomorphise large language models, they are actually mathematical models that generate text based on the patterns of words, parts of words, or individual characters (including punctuations) found in a large collection of human-written text that is available online. 9 We used “persona pattern” to give GenAI models a role to play when generating output (White et al. 2023). Title: Scaling Artificial Intelligence for Augmented Learning: Developing a Generative AI Evaluation Scale through a Case Study in Islamic Inheritance Law Article Type: Research Article DOI: https://doi.org/10.1163/27732363-20250002 Language: English Pages: 5–32 Keywords: generative AI ; Islamic inheritance law ; transparency ; accountability ; accuracy ; legal scholarship In: Journal of Digital Islamicate Research In: Volume 3: Issue 1 Received: 26 Jan 2025 Accepted: 19 May 2025 Publisher: Brill E-ISSN: 2773-2363 Subjects: General , Middle East and Islamic Studies , History &amp; Culture , Mathematics &amp; Computer Sciences , Biology , General , Education , Cultural History , Literature and Cultural Studies Content Metrics All Time Past 365 days Past 30 Days Abstract Views 54 54 54 Full Text Views 20 20 20 PDF Views & Downloads 43 43 43 Open Access Download PDF Download Citation Get Permissions Abstract 1 Introduction 2 Methodology 3 Results and Discussion 3.1 Overall Scores of ChatGPT-4, DeepSeek, Co-Pilot, and Gemini 3.2 Overall Scores of GenAI Models 4 How Can GenAI Models Be Utilized for Islamic Legal Education and Scholarship? 5 Conclusion Acknowledgement Appendix 1: Prompts Bibliography Product Information Books Journals Specialty Products Metadata: Title Lists, MARC &amp; KBART Files Catalogs, Flyers &amp; Price Lists Accessing Brill Products Authors Becoming a Brill Author Publishing Ethics Publishing Guides Contact &amp; Info Sales Contacts Ordering Editorial Contacts Press &amp; Reviews Contact Form Stay Updated Blog News Newsletters Social Media Overview Investors Resources Center General Resources For Authors For Librarians Rights &amp; Permissions FAQ Terms and Conditions &nbsp; Privacy Statement &nbsp; Cookie Settings &nbsp; Accessibility Legal Notice Sitemap Terms and Conditions &nbsp; |&nbsp;&nbsp; Privacy Statement &nbsp; |&nbsp; Cookie Settings &nbsp; |&nbsp;&nbsp; Accessibility &nbsp; |&nbsp; Legal Notice &nbsp; |&nbsp; Sitemap &nbsp; |&nbsp; Copyright &copy; 2016-2025 Powered by PubFactory [207.241.237.99] 207.241.237.99 Sign in to annotate Close Edit Annotation Character limit 500 /500 Delete Cancel Save --> --> @! Character limit 500 /500 Cancel Save View Expanded View Table View Full Size --> var require = {"shim":{"baseapp/components/FullContentLink":["jquery"],"baseapp/components/PdfJsInlineView":["jquery"],"baseapp/components/AddToDownloadButton":["jquery"],"t5/core/typeahead":["jquery"],"baseapp/components/TitleFilter":["jquery"],"baseapp/components/ContainerBlock":["jquery"],"baseapp/combined":["jquery","jquery-ui","modernizr","t5/core/typeahead"],"baseapp/components/TreeFilterSelectComponent":["jquery"],"baseapp/components/AuthProviders":["jquery"],"baseapp/combined-skin":["jquery","jquery-ui","t5/core/typeahead","modernizr"],"baseapp/components/OrderBillingAndShipping":["jquery"],"jquery-ui":["jquery"],"baseapp/components/AdvancedSearch":["jquery"],"baseapp/components/RedeemTokenCredit":["jquery"],"baseapp/components/ContentBox":["jquery"],"baseapp/combined-skin-min":["jquery","jquery-ui","t5/core/typeahead","modernizr"],"baseapp/components/CitedByWidget":["jquery"],"baseapp/components/ConfigurableAppBarBody":["jquery"],"baseapp/components/MyCartAddDiscountCode":["jquery"],"baseapp/components/thiss-ds":["jquery"],"skin/refworks":["jquery","modernizr"],"baseapp/components/GlossaryList":["jquery"],"baseapp/components/configurable/ContainerBlock":["jquery","jquery-ui"]},"baseUrl":"/modules.gz"}; console.debug('Loading 6 libraries synchronously in body, before Tapestry imports'); console.debug('Loading library /assets/shared/z7f586f90/js/dist/shareLinkEventListeners.js synchronously in body, before Tapestry imports'); console.debug('Loading library /assets/shared/zfb8a630e/js/dist/myContentAndMySearches.js synchronously in body, before Tapestry imports'); console.debug('Loading library /assets/shared/za9306a39/js/dist/jumpToMainContentFallback.js synchronously in body, before Tapestry imports'); console.debug('Loading library /assets/shared/z5dc94189/js/dist/contributorDetails.js synchronously in body, before Tapestry imports'); console.debug('Loading library /assets/shared/z1ce57e43/js/dist/exportCitation.js synchronously in body, before Tapestry imports'); console.debug('Loading library /assets/shared/z2b859a6d/js/dist/citationEventListeners.js synchronously in body, before Tapestry imports'); require(["t5/core/pageinit"], function(pi) { pi(["/skin/e45233a30083c1aec5ade3e1b57c141d1cf8a258/js/skin-sync.min.js","/assets/app/z7b5881d4/components/display/RedeemTokenCredit.js","/assets/arachne/z4dd3765e/arachne.js"], ["baseapp/combined-skin-min","modernizr","baseapp/components/ContentBox","baseapp/components/CitedByWidget","t5/core/zone","baseapp/annotation-engine",["baseapp/annotation-engine:init",{"personalizationSupport":false,"loginBoxHeight":"250","loginBoxWidth":"550","contentRoot":"articleBody"}],["t5/core/pageinit:focus","textarea"]]); }); console.debug('Loading 6 libraries synchronously in body, after Tapestry imports'); console.debug('Loading library /assets/shared/zbe047af3/js/dist/collapser.js synchronously in body, after Tapestry imports'); console.debug('Loading library /assets/vendor/z5ec668da/jquery-ui/jquery-ui.min.js synchronously in body, after Tapestry imports'); console.debug('Loading library /assets/responsive/zf0c61771/js/configurable-layout.js synchronously in body, after Tapestry imports'); console.debug('Loading library /assets/vendor/z5a39f990/slick-slider.js synchronously in body, after Tapestry imports'); console.debug('Loading library /assets/shared/ze49061c8/js/dist/imageLazyLoader.js synchronously in body, after Tapestry imports'); console.debug('Loading library /assets/app/z3c708875/components/configurable/ConfigurableAppBarBody.js synchronously in body, after Tapestry imports'); window.initAccordion({ "wrapperId" : ".container-wrapper-133276", "active" : false }) window.initAccordion({ "wrapperId" : ".container-wrapper-133291", "active" : false }) window.initAccordion({ "wrapperId" : ".container-wrapper-133288", "active" : false }) window.initAccordion({ "wrapperId" : ".container-wrapper-133275", "active" : false }) window.initAccordion({ "wrapperId" : ".container-wrapper-133268", "active" : false }) window.initAccordion({ "wrapperId" : ".container-wrapper-133298", "active" : false }) 