UCP Journal of Law & Legal Education 
Vol. 2, Issue 2 (January - June 2024) 
28 
*Professor, University of Macau, Macau SAR, China. email: emailperu@gmail. 
com 
Article History: Received; 13 June 2024; Received in revised form 05 August 2024; Accepted: 07 
August 2024 
Available online: 15 August 2024 
Evolving Norms Governing AI Engagement in Legal Practice 
and the Prospective Alignment of Law School Curriculum 
M. P. Ramaswamy* 
 
Abstract 
 
As artificial intelligence (AI) applications transcend to yield 
generative outcomes, the significance of its engagement to enhance 
productivity in legal practice and dispute resolution forums is 
increasingly emphasised. With the recent advent of an impressive 
array of generative AI programs, the urge to harness the technology 
in the legal profession is difficult to resist. Professional standards 
of AI engagement are being introduced to respond to the increasing 
engagement of generative AI in serving legal clientele. Normative 
prescriptions governing the use of AI in legal practice are crucial 
to ensure that the right balance is achieved between the benefits 
offered by the technology and the rights of the clients served. The 
paper aims to investigate pioneering professional standards 
regulating AI use in US legal practice and assess how they achieve 
a balance of interests and adhere to some fundamental principles. 
The paper calls for a contextual understanding of the technological 
functioning of AI for its effective professional engagement and the 
development of governing standards. The paper assesses a range of 
specific professional and judicial standards governing generative 
AI use in the US and explores their relevance for other jurisdictions. 
The paper argues the limitation of continuing legal education to 
produce AI-empowered lawyers. It proposes the significance of the 
need for law schools to step in with the necessary curriculum and 
pedagogical alignment with emerging AI applications and 
regulatory standards. The paper concludes by examining its key 
findings and underscores the significance of upholding the right to 
access AI. 
 
Keywords: Artificial intelligence, legal profession, regulatory 
standards, legal education, curriculum alignment. 
 
  
 

Evolving Norms Governing AI Engagement in Legal Practice and the 
Prospective Alignment of Law School Curriculum 
29 
Introduction 
 
The legal profession is no ordinary profession. It has a 
special status due to its distinctive role in perpetuating the rule of 
law in each society. Unlike other professional pursuits that may be 
subjected to state-enacted regulatory regimes, the grant of self-
regulatory privilege to the legal profession is crucial to ensure the 
independence of the vocation. However, with autonomy comes 
accountability, which the licensing agencies should incessantly 
ensure through the enactment and effective enforcement of 
comprehensive professional conduct rules. In circumstances of any 
lackadaisical response of the licensing agencies to emerging 
concerns, a consequential question of whether other pertinent bodies 
like the judiciary or even the state regulatory entities should step in 
and seek to introduce necessary checks and balances becomes 
relevant. The caveats of caution upon any intrusion into the self-
regulatory sphere arguably enhance the onus upon the licensing 
agencies to effectively gauge regulatory needs and act on time to 
avoid circumstances warranting intervention from external bodies.  
Beyond the question of regulatory prerogative, the 
construction of standards governing the conduct of lawyers should 
be a very delicate process balancing diverse needs and interests, 
including the rights and interests of the served clientele, the integrity 
of the profession, the pursuit of seeking justice and upholding rule 
of law, the facilitative function for judicial determination or decision 
making by other redressal forums, the modernisation of professional 
practice to respond to changing social realities, and the protection of 
privileges and interest of legal practitioners. However, on certain 
emerging issues facing the legal profession, like embracing 
technological evolution to enhance the effectiveness and efficiency 
of legal services, professional standards governing modern 
technologies are sparse and difficult to evaluate. 
With the advent of Artificial Intelligence (AI) and its recent 
resurgence, especially in the form of generative AI, the potential 
engagement of the technology in the legal profession is perceived to 
have far-reaching implications affecting the role of lawyers in 
serving clients. While the proponents of engagement of generative 
AI in legal practice emphasise the importance of reaping the benefits 
of generative AI to serve the best interests of the clients, the critics 
are highly concerned about the potential risks undermining the 

UCP Journal of Law & Legal Education 
30 
rights of clients, including the basic expectation of receiving legal 
advice or service from a natural person legal practitioner rather than 
from 
an 
artificially 
permeated 
technological 
intelligence. 
Considering such unique concerns, the need to develop regulatory 
standards governing the use of generative AI in legal practice, 
balancing the benefits and risks of its engagement in the legal 
profession, has gained particular significance.  
The present paper aims to identify and assess some of the 
pioneering professional standards in the US promoting and 
streamlining the use of AI, particularly generative AI, in legal 
practice. It investigates how formal legal education that forms part 
of the upstream inculcation of professional skills and knowledge 
should embrace generative AI-related curriculum enhancements. To 
address the shortage of AI-informed legal curriculum and pedagogy, 
the present paper argues that promoting responsible use of 
generative AI in the legal profession can only be achieved if lawyers 
are trained to tame the technology to suit the needs and integrity of 
the profession from the formation years during their time at law 
schools. The paper reviews some pertinent scholarly works 
examining specific issues of the prerogative of the legal profession 
to self-regulate the practice of law and the nature of the ensuing 
accountability of the profession. The paper briefly examines the 
nature and types of AI technology along with its functional 
characteristics to call upon the need to enhance the basic 
understanding among the legal fraternity for the effective use and 
regulation of AI in the legal profession. The paper identifies some 
emerging regulatory standards governing the use of AI in American 
legal practice to determine how the early attempts to regulate AI 
engagement in the legal profession seek to balance the related rights 
and interests. The paper argues the limitations of continuing legal 
education programs providing AI training for lawyers and calls upon 
the need for law school initiatives incorporating AI elements in legal 
curriculum and pedagogy. The concluding part of the paper 
highlights the relevance and limitations of the American experience 
for other common law jurisdictions preparing to embrace AI in legal 
practice. 
 
 
 
 

Evolving Norms Governing AI Engagement in Legal Practice and the 
Prospective Alignment of Law School Curriculum 
31 
Literature Review 
 
One of the important works tracing the evolution of 
autonomy and self-regulation in the American legal profession and 
the subsequent emergence of competing external controls was 
produced by Powell as early as 1985 (Powell, 1985). Although the 
findings of the work revealed evidence of some erosion of the 
prerogatives of the profession, the study argued that any external 
regulatory controls were only supplementary and were, after all, 
initiated under the auspices of the profession itself. The study 
concluded that the external controls only redefined the autonomy 
and the self-regulatory powers but did not replace them. In contrast, 
Macey's subsequent work argued against the need to sustain the 
system of self-regulation due to the increasing ineffectiveness of 
internal sanctions and growing competition in legal practice 
(Macey, 2005). In her work examining the role of accountability in 
the legal profession, Fortney exposed how limited liability 
characteristics of law firm partnerships dented accountability and 
recommended relevant remedial measures (Fortney, 2012). The 
work pointed out the distinctive features constituting law as a unique 
profession, where collective responsibility to uphold common 
values and the development and application of self-regulatory 
measures were found to have the potential to enhance accountability 
in the profession. The work highlighted the importance of 
introducing specific measures like professional indemnity 
insurance, as required in some common law countries, to fill the 
void and protect clients' interests.  
On the other hand, Rhode’s exploration of accountability 
had a broader mandate of exploring the question from a comparative 
perspective and examining its nexus to the higher goal of access to 
justice and legal services (Rhode, 2003). The work signified the 
importance of professional accountability to quell some prevalent 
perspectives of lack of credibility and ethical adherence among the 
legal community. The significance of credibility as an inevitable 
trait in enhancing lawyers' professional accountability was the core 
of Wendel's thesis (Wendel, 2003). His interesting work explored a 
range of informal methods that could strengthen accountability 
among lawyers. In particular, articulating the unique role non-legal 
sanctions could play in regulating certain professional behaviour, 
was an important contribution of Wendel’s work.  

UCP Journal of Law & Legal Education 
32 
The research of Margulies has an interesting exposition of 
the accountability of lawyers representing the state and the need to 
regulate the actions initiated by the state organs in terrorism cases 
(Margulies, 2005). Addressing questions like prosecutorial 
accountability in this work added much-needed attention to the 
measures essential to ensure lawyering for the state does not escape 
the inevitable standards of accountability. Similarly, while exposing 
serious shortcomings in internal and external mechanisms seeking 
accountability of prosecuting lawyers in various jurisdictions 
worldwide, Wright and Miller called for enhanced transparency and 
bureaucratic supervision to achieve prosecutorial accountability in 
the US (Wright & Miller, 2010).  
Ellis's work went one step further by calling upon the 
significance of nurturing universal principles and ethical standards 
governing the legal profession to enhance accountability (Ellis, 
2002). The work emphasised a range of ethical tenets essential for 
improving accountability and developing a new era of 
accountability in the twenty-first century. The prescribed tenets 
included training young legal minds, which is relevant for the 
present paper exploring the role of law schools in taming budding 
lawyers to adopt AI technology in legal practice yet remain 
accountable.  
Another pertinent work on the subject matter of enquiry of 
the present paper was published by Simshaw well before generative 
AI became prominent. In 2018, Simshaw systematically took stock 
of some fundamental ethical issues arising in the use of AI and 
revealed the inadequacy of the existing rules of the American Bar 
Association (ABA) and other State Bars to address the unique 
challenges posed by AI (Simshaw, 2018). The work categorically 
called upon the need to introduce standards governing the 
development and deployment of AI in the legal profession. Just 
preceding Simshaw's work, Arruda explored an interesting question 
of whether lawyers had an ethical obligation to engage AI in legal 
practice to ensure effective legal services are rendered to clients 
(Arruda, 2017). The work, while identifying the key attributes of AI 
that will be pertinent for various applications in the legal field, 
argued against the fears of AI overtaking the works of a lawyer and 
urged the need for developing relevant practice standards to ensure 
professional accountability. Similar calls for reforming professional 
conduct rules to accommodate the use of AI in legal practice were 

Evolving Norms Governing AI Engagement in Legal Practice and the 
Prospective Alignment of Law School Curriculum 
33 
also made by other scholarly works during the same period 
(Medianik, 2017-2018). 
Medianik proposed that the ABA adopt rules mandating 
continuing legal education for lawyers to obtain speciality credit for 
using legal technology involving AI and that law firms provide in-
house training to promote the use of AI. Finally, on the issue of law 
schools playing a fundamental role in fostering the use of 
technology during the formation years of legal education, Otey's 
work is a notable contribution. In response to the technologically 
inspired younger generation of law students, as well as the changing 
realities and expectations of the legal profession, Otey’s work 
mainly recommended that law schools adequately equip law 
graduates with the necessary technological skills essential to prepare 
the students for a new kind of legal practice (Otey, 2014). As part of 
the proposal, the study emphasised the importance of designing a 
law school curriculum embedded with essential elements of 
technology and teaching technological professionalism using the 
pedagogy of clinical legal education. 
 
The Nature of AI Technology and the Determination of the 
Functional Parallels 
 
As the AI applications in various fields of services are 
growing by leaps and bounds, especially after the power of 
generative AI became accessible to the masses since the 
introduction of LLM-based interactive bots like ChatGPT in late 
2022, some key benefits AI can offer for legal profession are 
generally evident. However, the full range of potential benefits it 
could provide to legal practice or the gravity of the inherent risk of 
their engagement are not yet fully discernible. A brief analysis of 
the scope of some emerging AI technologies and identifying certain 
positive or negative implications for the legal profession will set the 
stage for assessing the integrity of early regulatory standards 
governing the use of AI in legal practice. A detailed examination of 
AI technology, every benefit it offers or the specific risks it poses to 
the practice of law are not relevant to the present discussion. 
However, some of the distinctive features of AI, in particular the 
dynamic elements of generative AI and their potential impact on the 
practice of law, are essential to the discussion. This is mainly to 
demonstrate why, unlike any other information technology 

UCP Journal of Law & Legal Education 
34 
embraced by the legal profession in the past, AI's engagement could 
alter the basic equation of the legal service provision itself. Based 
on AI’s potential to influence some fundamental traits of the legal 
profession, it is arguable that its regulatory standards should not 
remain static and should be adapted to suit the transforming realities. 
As AI's potential continues to be redefined with the rapid 
evolution of technology, it will not be possible to fully assess the 
future scope of AI applications in legal practice. Firstly, it is 
arguable that any regulatory standards governing the use of AI in 
the legal profession should be formed to imbibe this very state of 
flux of AI technology. Secondly, any regulatory standards 
governing AI use in the legal profession should effectively reflect 
its distinctive technological capabilities and how they could alter the 
fundamental characteristics of the legal services provision. In this 
regard, the regulatory stocktaking of the technology does not need 
to take a micro approach of reviewing the implications of every AI 
technology developed for the legal profession. Alternatively, 
ordaining the regulatory standards should take a technologically 
neutral approach, analogous to the experience of well-renowned 
international legal harmonisation initiatives governing AI 
(UNCITRAL, 2023).  
The advantage of taking a technologically neutral approach 
would shift the focus on certain common characteristics underlying 
the technological processes of AI to determine the development of 
relevant regulatory standards instead of requiring a review of 
individual AI applications. In addition, it is also crucial to choose 
certain foundations for regulatory development, as it would provide 
a common thread to comprehend the diversity in technological 
processes and related intricacies in designing relevant professional 
standards governing AI. In this regard, a principles-based approach 
will be highly relevant, utilising some of the proven principles 
adopted in national regulatory enactments governing technologies 
in the past, like the functional equivalency principle. The successful 
regional experience in the European Union (EU) in developing an 
effective liability regime for the use of AI in general, utilising a 
principles-based approach, is a good example that merits 
consideration (Durante & Floridi, 2022).  
In line with the need to determine how different AI could 
impede the functions of the legal profession, it is essential to have a 
broad understanding of the technological processes underlying AI. 

Evolving Norms Governing AI Engagement in Legal Practice and the 
Prospective Alignment of Law School Curriculum 
35 
Firstly, the licensing agencies seeking to regulate AI use in the legal 
profession should restrict the functioning of conventional AI and 
generative AI. Although the latter is a subset of the former, some 
fundamental differences exist in their underlying technological 
processes. Traditional AI is primarily designed based on pre-
designed algorithms, which can make decisions or predictions 
utilising prescribed rules in interpreting certain inputs or data. They 
can process or analyse data per the pre-defined rules and provide 
recommendations or sort underlying information or content. 
However, they do not, as such, generate any new content or creative 
works. Therefore, their function and behaviour are relatively 
explicable, although advanced AI systems could be designed to 
evolve from experience that could even result in enigmatic 
behaviour. In comparison, however, generative AI systems are 
characterised by their capacity to produce or create new works or 
content that did not exist before. They are more sophisticated in self-
evolution with an inherent capacity to learn from unlimited or large 
data sets. They are more capable of reinforcing their algorithms and 
prescribing rules of behaviour from the experiences gained. They 
could evolve even faster given the exposure to large data sets. 
Therefore, any regulatory standards developed to govern AI 
applications in the legal profession should give due regard to the 
distinctive characteristics of the AI as well as its generative 
iterations.  
As alluded to already, regulatory initiatives governing the 
use of AI in the legal profession could take a principles-based macro 
approach, for which a clear understanding of some essential 
characteristics of the AI domain is crucial. Identifying distinct types 
of algorithms and generative AI applications and appraising their 
potential impact on the fundamental traits of the legal profession are 
especially vital. Firstly, a clear understanding of different types of 
algorithms and their characteristics is essential because of the 
central role they play in any AI technology. As algorithms form the 
core part of AI technology and are infused with the fundamental 
rules directing AI learning and its functioning, understanding them 
is essential in developing algorithmic regulations. As key 
jurisdictions like the EU and China have started to enact specific 
rules governing algorithms embedded in information recommender 
systems used by online platforms and search engines, the 
significance of developing specific professional standards targeting 

UCP Journal of Law & Legal Education 
36 
algorithms in other service frontiers like legal services need not be 
overstated (Roberts, et al., 2023).  
Three distinct characteristics are discernible from common 
types of algorithms, namely those algorithms that are developed to 
achieve learning from categorised and labelled data sets subjected 
to supervision, algorithms that are constructed to freely learn from 
large sets of unlabelled data without any supervision and algorithms 
that are primarily designed learn from interactions in each 
environment and thereby achieving a reinforced learning from 
various real-world experiences. Such algorithms may interact with 
data sets by employing different learning and processing techniques. 
While various machine learning techniques using unprogrammed 
statistical functions are typically employed by algorithms, some 
deep learning techniques using multi-layered neural networks 
handling complex data sets could be utilised by sophisticated 
algorithms. On the other hand, algorithms that are used in interactive 
AI systems commonly adopt a Natural Language Processing (NLP) 
technique that can comprehend human communication and 
languages and generate responsive outputs.  
Finally, with the onset of ChatGPT, it is crucial to 
understand various types of generative AI to ascertain the potential 
impact they could have in legal practice. The types of generative AI 
transcend beyond ChatGPT, as typical generative AI models can 
produce creative, original content by interpreting and combining 
attributes of large sets of preexisting data through algorithmic 
executions. ChatGPT, a specific type of generative AI, specialises 
in reacting to human prompts in conversational exchanges and 
producing real-time responses and outputs. It also permeates into the 
sphere of user-prompted alterations and choices, enabling any 
customisation to the point of satisfaction. Such technical capabilities 
have even prompted judicial claims involving contentions of 
intellectual property rights protection for the works produced by 
generative AI (Stephen Thaler v. Shira Perlmutter and US Copyright 
Office, 2023). Moreover, while the techniques typically employed 
by ChatGPT are based on Large Language Models (LLMs) 
embedding an NLP, other generative AI models could use a range 
of techniques, including Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs), 
Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) and Generative Adversarial 
Networks (GANs). Although examining and distinguishing the 
characteristics of these key techniques employed by generative AI 

Evolving Norms Governing AI Engagement in Legal Practice and the 
Prospective Alignment of Law School Curriculum 
37 
models is not necessary here, gaining the relevant understanding to 
determine the impact they could distinctly have on the legal 
profession is crucial for the formulation of the regulatory standards 
based on a functional equivalence approach alluded to earlier.  
Before moving to assess some of the emerging professional 
standards governing the use of AI in the legal practice, a brief 
narrative of how the understanding of the technical aspects of AI to 
determine its functional status impacts the legal profession could 
come into play concerning some judicial decision pertinent to the 
question would be apposite here. Some of the American judicial 
decisions determining what activities could constitute the function 
of practising law would be a useful reference to draw an analogy in 
assessing whether the functions of AI could constitute the legal 
practice and hence be subjected to the professional rules of practice 
in a particular jurisdiction. One of the US cases, the dictum of which 
is used to draw some comparisons in this regard, is the case of David 
Lola v. Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher & Flom and Tower Legal 
Staffing decided by the Second Circuit Court of Appeal (Lola v 
Skadden and others, 2015). Based on the judicial dictum laid down 
by the US Court of Appeal, while reversing the finding of the US 
District Court, on whether the acts of reviewing legal documents 
amount to legal practice in the State of North Carolina, studies have 
drawn analogies for the use of AI in the legal profession (Simon, 
Lindsay, Sosa, & Comparato, 2018).  
The potential implications of Lola v Skadden and Others for 
the use of AI are found to include the possibility of machines 
narrowing the sphere of activities considered as part of legal 
practice, the consequential fallout of such activities from the 
application of professional rules and the need for legal practitioners 
to adapt to the impact of the technology by focusing more on 
innovative work and professional judgment that may not be 
considered a mechanical tasks and easily replicated by the machine. 
When the Court of Appeal in the Lola case was asked to determine 
whether the task of document review carried out by the plaintiff 
amounted to an engagement in the practice of law, to decide whether 
or not it could be exempted from the application of rules governing 
overtime work, the interpretative process of the court in that context 
is arguably good evidence of a functional approach. The court’s 
approach, in this case, draws some parallels between the task carried 
out by the plaintiff and the functions that can be exclusively 

UCP Journal of Law & Legal Education 
38 
discharged by a lawyer under his license to serve as an attorney in a 
particular jurisdiction, which could serve as a useful model in 
assessing the increasing role of AI in the legal profession.  
In particular, the court’s reference to some key points like 
the impossibility of legally practising law without a license, what 
can constitute the unauthorised practice of law, whether a lawyer 
could ethically outsource legal support services from non-lawyers 
or lawyers not licensed to practice in the jurisdiction in question, 
and can any review of legal documents carried out by a non-lawyer 
under the supervision of a licensed attorney could automatically 
amount to legal practice, are highly relevant for assessing the nature 
of the tasks carried out by AI engaged by a licensed legal 
practitioner. Similarly, the key departing point between the District 
Court and the Court of Appeal in Lola’s case concerns the distinct 
emphasis of the former that any level of review of legal documents 
will constitute a legal practice, in contrast to the conclusion of the 
latter that only review of legal documents that warrant an exercise 
of independent legal judgement in making decisions for a client will 
fall in that class, should serve as a very pertinent methodology in 
assessing the functional nature of the AI use in the legal profession.  
 
Emerging Standards Governing AI Use in the Legal Profession 
 
As a jurisdiction which primarily recognises the autonomy 
of the legal profession to regulate itself, new standards or reforming 
existing standards governing legal practice are expected to be 
developed more responsively in the US than in other jurisdictions, 
where external organs like state regulators are empowered to issue 
regulatory standards. Especially in critical situations like the sudden 
onset of generative AI, widely perceived as a disruptive technology, 
and the possibility of its wider adoption in the profession, standards 
should swiftly arrive. This expectation is met by the range of 
initiatives that have recently emerged in the US, and a selective 
review of some of the distinct provisions in the remainder of this 
section should provide important insights into how the first 
generation of standards seeks to achieve a balance between the 
benefits and risks of generative AI use in legal practice. Notably, the 
pioneering US initiatives transcend beyond those developed by the 
professional licensing bodies, as some dispute settlement 
institutions have also promptly issued relevant directives. It is 

Evolving Norms Governing AI Engagement in Legal Practice and the 
Prospective Alignment of Law School Curriculum 
39 
important to note that some of the AI-related standards in these 
initiatives are prescribed to guide judges to ensure that AI use 
related to the judicial process is indeed in compliance with relevant 
laws and rules of the court. This phenomenon arguably evidences 
the significance of the matter, and the use of generative AI in legal 
practice is a common concern of practitioners and dispute settlement 
forums.  
Moreover, in the US, the jurisdiction where the first 
iterations of generative AI like ChatGPT and others were widely 
made available, some bitter experiences resulting from the use of 
generative AI in legal practice have prompted wider regulatory 
responses, providing useful references for other jurisdictions. For 
example, the infamous case of Mata v Avianca Inc., where the New 
York Southern District Court had to sanction the attorneys who 
ended up citing fake cases fabricated by the generative AI tools, 
exacerbated the concerns of irresponsible use of generative AI 
prompting the need for wider response by professional agencies and 
dispute settlement bodies (Mata v. Avianca Inc., 2023). A similarly 
grave error of citing fictitious cases produced by generative AI was 
also sanctioned by the Superior Court of Massachusetts in a recent 
case of Darlene Smith v Matthew Farwell and Others in February 
2024 (Darlene Smith v Matthew Farwell and Others , 2024). The 
latest case evidences the continued risk of using generative AI in 
legal practice and reinforces the need for effective regulation. 
Various national and state-level bodies issue the US 
standards governing the use of AI in the legal profession. Firstly, the 
AI-related resolutions of the American Bar Association (ABA), 
being a multifaced institution serving in several capacities, 
including as a voluntary professional association at the national 
level, a key law schools accreditation body, a continuing legal 
education provider and a program organiser to assist lawyers and 
judges, gains prominence. In addition to the AI-specific resolutions, 
the general rules of professional conduct prescribed by ABA will 
also have implications and warrant adaptation in using AI in legal 
practice. For example, one of the pertinent provisions of the 
professional conduct rules can be found in ABA Model Rule 1.1, 
amended in 2012. Comment 6 of the Rule is a classic example of a 
balancing mandate imposed on the use of technology by legal 
practitioners. It imposes a clear responsibility on lawyers to be 
knowledgeable about the benefits and risks associated with using 

UCP Journal of Law & Legal Education 
40 
technology in law practice. Although this is a broad obligation 
related to the use of technology in general, the balancing 
characteristic mandating the tapping of technological potential and 
the fortification against its inherent risks will serve as a basic pillar 
of the ABA standards governing AI use in the legal profession. 
One of the ABA initiatives specifically relating to AI was its 
2019 Resolution No. 112, which called upon lawyers and judicial 
organs to take stock of ethical concerns and legal issues arising in 
using AI in legal practice (ABA, 2019). It called upon the need to 
address three specific sets of concerns. The first set of worries 
consisted of the risks of AI bias, the challenges of explainability, 
and the lack of transparency in its automated decision-making. The 
second concern was how AI could be ethically and beneficially used 
in practising law. The final concern highlighted the need to exercise 
sufficient control and oversight of the functioning of AI and the 
vendors that supply the AI. Being one of the earliest professional 
directives on the specific use of AI in legal practice, the three sets 
of concerns will continue to influence the conduct of lawyers and 
judicial organs in the USA. The ABA Resolution 604 passed in 
February 2023 is not just specifically aimed at legal practitioners but 
a range of allied stakeholders who may be involved in the design, 
development, deployment, use and regulation of AI in various 
contexts of operations in a legal system (ABA, 2023).  
Resolution 604 promotes three core principles: transparency, 
traceability and an ultimate emphasis on overall accountability. It 
calls for human and enterprise accountability and denounces 
attempts to transfer legal responsibility to an algorithm. It mandates 
exercising human authority, oversight and control of AI systems. It 
guides legal practitioners in assessing the compatibility of AI 
systems with the three core principles. Resolution 604 also aims to 
enhance the capacity of the courts and legal practitioners to evaluate 
and resolve legal questions in dispute resolution through the 
specification of the necessary information required in any 
engagement with AI. On the auspices of passing Resolution 604, 
concerns were also expressed about the struggles faced by law 
professors regarding the use of generative AI like ChatGPT by law 
students (White, 2023).  
Finally, another resolution of ABA which has great potential 
to prompt the development of AI applications in the justice system 
is the ABA Resolution 700, passed in February 2022. This 

Evolving Norms Governing AI Engagement in Legal Practice and the 
Prospective Alignment of Law School Curriculum 
41 
Resolution, although it does not directly refer to AI calls upon the 
criminal justice system to refrain from using risk assessment and 
pre-trial release assessment tools that are flawed due to inherent 
racial or economic bias. Integrating such tools has the potential to 
motivate the development and use of AI tools and applications 
capable of identifying and eradicating boggling bias (ABA, 2022).  
Beyond ABA, several state bar associations in the USA have 
issued standards governing AI use in legal and judicial practices. 
Reference to the initiatives of some key representational Bar 
Associations would suffice to ascertain distinct characteristics of the 
emerging standards governing AI use at the state level. On the West 
Coast, the Californian Bar Association made a prominent effort. The 
guidelines issued in November 2023 by the California Bar 
specifically address the use of generative AI in legal practice by 
prescribing four distinct duties and five specific obligations 
(California State Bar, 2023). To uphold the duty of confidentiality, 
lawyers using AI are required to anonymise client information 
before inputting it into a generative AI system, ensuring that client 
information is not shared with others or used for training purposes 
or system improvement.  
Calling for a duty of competence and due diligence, 
overreliance on AI systems compromising the application of trained 
judgement of the practising lawyer is not permitted. Any output 
from generative AI should be supplemented with professional 
scrutiny and verification by the lawyer, and the delegation of 
professional judgment to a generative AI system is prohibited. 
Lawyers are subject to comply with all laws, including privacy laws, 
cross-border data transfer laws, and intellectual property laws, while 
using generative AI. A duty of overall supervision of the use of 
generative AI in law firms, along with a prohibition of impinging 
upon subordinate lawyers’ professional responsibility during their 
use of generative AI is also recognised under the 2023 Californian 
Guidelines. It imposes a very important obligation upon the lawyers 
to communicate to their clients about any use of generative AI in the 
legal services rendered, as well as the risks involved, and adhere to 
any instructions given by clients that have a limiting or restricting 
effect on engaging generative AI.  
The lawyers are obliged not to charge their clients based on 
the number of hours potentially saved by generative AI and only 
charge for the actual hours spent using generative AI. Lawyers 

UCP Journal of Law & Legal Education 
42 
engaging in generative AI should review all the output generated by 
the AI to ensure accuracy before submitting any related work to the 
judiciary and strictly follow the rules mandating the disclosure of 
the use of generative AI. Lawyers must seek a continuous 
understanding of the potential bias inherent in the functioning of 
generative AI systems and take sufficient measures to prevent the 
risks of bias. Californian guidelines also prescribe that lawyers 
licensed in multiple jurisdictions adhere to relevant laws and 
regulations imposing any pertinent professional responsibilities. 
Having reviewed the ABA and Californian professional 
rules in detail to highlight the major values and guarantees 
emphasised in streamlining AI use in the legal profession, a brief 
reference to some key regional and judicial initiatives in the US, in 
the remainder of this section, will point out to other distinct 
provisions and standards. In the East, a very recent initiative of the 
New Jersey Supreme Court in 2024 has taken a different approach, 
which, instead of issuing a new set of rules, issued temporary 
guidance on how attorneys could use AI in consonance with the 
existing rules of professional conduct. Although the New Jersey 
initiative, more or less, reflects those of the Californian standards 
discussed earlier, they are found to differ concerning the 
requirement of mandatory disclosure of the use of AI, as such a duty 
is imposed only in the event of demand or enquiry by a client 
(Brennan, Stone, Kampfe, & Zogby, 2024).  
In the North, the 2023 Ethics Opinion of Michigan State Bar 
JI-155 issues guidance on understanding technology and artificial 
intelligence to judicial officers. It requires them to take all 
reasonable measures to ensure that any use of AI tools to form their 
judgments is proper and complies with the law and the rules of the 
court. It also imposes a duty on them to gain relevant technological 
competencies in AI and understand its ethical implications to attain 
efficiency and to not to compromise the quality of justice. It 
mandates an understanding of benefits and risks, including pitfalls 
of algorithms in AI systems used by the courts and the lawyers 
appearing before the courts (Michigan State Bar, 2023).  
In the South, the Florida State Bar initiative would be a 
befitting example for completing the representative initiatives on 
using generative AI in the US. In January 2024, the Florida Bar 
issued the Ethics Opinion 24-1 that systematically addresses the use 
of generative AI in legal practice on several pertinent issues (Florida 

Evolving Norms Governing AI Engagement in Legal Practice and the 
Prospective Alignment of Law School Curriculum 
43 
Bar, 2024). Although many principles found in the Californian 
Guidelines 2023 are present here, several specific concerns are 
addressed in depth, which exemplifies the intricacies that may occur 
in the practical use of generative AI in legal practice. In addition, 
the Florida Opinion adds an obligation not to transgress the 
restrictions on advertising legal services using generative AI. While 
the use of generative AI by a law firm could be advertised, 
unverified claims of superiority of the generative AI system used by 
comparing with the AI systems used by other law firms are not 
permitted. 
Some unique, in-depth issues arising in the Florida Opinion 
will be a useful reference for other jurisdictions. Generative AI 
chatbots used to communicate with clients and third parties mandate 
that lawyers incorporate prescribed disclaimers. It also alerts the 
possibility that the use of AI chatbots in law firm websites to solicit 
clients could inadvertently create an attorney-client relationship, 
referring to the judicial dictum in Bartholomew v Bartholomew that 
held that such a relationship depended upon the belief of the client 
rather than the intent of the attorney (Bartholomew v. Bartholomew, 
1992.). It imposes a duty on lawyers to maintain technological 
competence and get educated on AI risks and benefits.  
Interestingly, to enumerate the specific duties of lawyers 
using generative AI, the Florida Opinion recommends drawing an 
analogy from the responsibilities of lawyers arising in the context of 
engagement of nonlawyer assistants in legal practice. For example, 
one of the offshoots of such a duty is the need to verify all works 
produced by nonlawyer assistants or generative AI, and lawyers will 
bear the primary responsibility for the accuracy of such work despite 
being created by either of the former. It recommends seeking 
informed consent from clients to use generative AI to disclose 
confidential information. Specific duties of confidentially are 
prescribed for generative AI with self-learning abilities. Again, the 
Opinion recommends drawing an analogy from guidelines 
governing other technologies or services like cloud computing or 
remote paralegal services. The Florida Opinion ultimately makes a 
crucial suggestion for mitigating confidentiality concerns by 
referring to the possibility of using in-house generative AI in law 
firms instead of third-party tools. 
In addition to the above, there are initiatives recommended 
by judicial institutions that can provide more specific insights. 

UCP Journal of Law & Legal Education 
44 
Prominent initiatives include the 2023 Order on AI issued by the US 
Court of International Trade (Vaden, 2023), the Advisory Opinion 
No.2023-22 issued by the Judicial Investigation Commission of 
West Virginia on the purposes for which judges may use AI in the 
discharge of their duties (JIC, 2023) and the Standing Order for Civil 
Cases Before A Magistrate Judge in the District Court for the 
Northern District of Illinois (Fuentes, 2023). A closer review of 
these initiatives reveals that their major objective is to streamline the 
usage of AI by attorneys in matters involving interactions with the 
judicial process, and the usage of AI by judges on issues relating to 
the discharge of their functions. Moreover, a comparative 
assessment of the specific provisions from these initiatives reveals 
how legal practitioners' regulatory perspectives of AI usage may 
manifest differently based on their respective roles in relation to 
clients and the judiciary. 
 
Alignment of Law School Curriculum and Pedagogy 
 
From the analysis of the concerns of AI usage in the legal 
profession and the emerging standards governing the same, some 
core findings could be derived that signify law schools' imperative 
role in promoting the fundamental regulatory spirit. First and 
foremost, it is important to note that, unlike any other technologies 
previously found useful in law practice, AI is perceived as 
indispensable to guarantee that clients are not denied the 
incomparable and invaluable benefits AI could offer. This 
realisation, arguably, will perpetuate a wider recognition that the 
engagement of AI in legal services is almost a matter of the client's 
rights and the duty of the lawyers. Such a recognition will not leave 
the question of using AI in the legal profession a matter of choice. 
Under such circumstances, lawyers will inevitably need to be 
equipped with essential skills for the creative and responsible use of 
AI in law practice. 
The onus of training lawyers with the fast-evolving AI 
applications and tools could primarily be seen as a domain of 
continuing legal education. However, it is highly questionable 
whether the demands of AI training for lawyers could be met with 
continuing legal education programs due to their limited scope. 
Moreover, analysing some emerging standards reveals that the spirit 
transcends beyond simple training using existing AI tools. As 

Evolving Norms Governing AI Engagement in Legal Practice and the 
Prospective Alignment of Law School Curriculum 
45 
discussed earlier, some standards prescribe developing and using in-
house AI tools instead of utilising external or commercially 
available ones. Such inspiration warrants a more systematic and in-
depth training of lawyers to ensure a deeper engagement in the 
construction, training and use of any in-house AI tools. Continuing 
legal education cannot cater to learning needs in such contexts, and 
the need for law schools to step in to fill the void is inevitable. 
Like the legal profession, law schools are also increasingly 
called upon to engage in AI orientation (Reid, 2019). The role of 
law schools in this regard should be twofold. Firstly, to meet the 
needs of qualified lawyers, offering an appropriate level of higher 
degree or diploma programs based on AI-enriched curricula. Such a 
curriculum should be carefully constructed by incorporating AI-
oriented components aligned with professional standards governing 
AI. Inculcating associated AI skills essential for speciality legal 
practice will particularly enable the possibility of tapping into 
numerous potential generative AI offers. In addition to the 
speciality, offering interdisciplinary higher degree programs like 
master’s in data science and law, which some institutions already 
provide, can serve as an effective platform to nurture a mixed set of 
essential skills and the knowledge required for effective AI 
engagement in any field of legal practice. 
Secondly, it is highly suitable for law schools to consider 
refurbishing basic law degree curricula to address the emerging 
needs produced by generative AI. Besides, incorporating generative 
AI for various pedagogical purposes to enhance effective learning 
in law schools is also becoming a trend. As law schools are more 
open to allowing students’ usage of generative AI tools for learning 
and producing works for assessment, redesigning curriculum and 
pedagogy in line with the professional expectations of AI use and 
standards governing the same will ensure that graduating students 
can cope very well with the expansive demands of the profession 
driven by the inexplicable opportunities and risks of generative AI.  
Law schools should ensure that their reformed curriculum 
and pedagogy sufficiently align with and reflect the emerging 
professional standards governing the use of AI in legal practice and 
judiciary as discussed in the previous section. Moreover, law 
schools should also ensure that the conventional elements of legal 
acumen are not impaired in the pursuit of AI skills training.  

UCP Journal of Law & Legal Education 
46 
Introducing specific pedagogy and assessment tools capable 
of confirming that law students can use AI tools in a responsible and 
accountable manner is highly desirable. For example, law schools 
should ensure that the students can verify the results of generative 
AI-produced legal works with conventional legal wisdom and 
knowledge instead of merely reproducing them. A combination of 
modern assessment tools like AI writing detection and verification 
tools, along with traditional legal education tools like the Socratic 
method, mooting and open presentations subjected to expert 
scrutiny, should all be able to test the acquisition of personal legal 
traits.  Moreover, students should also be able to demonstrate how 
they framed and modified the relevant parameters and inputs fed 
into a generative AI system, and the output in question resulted from 
their creative (and not mechanical) engagement with the AI tool. 
Engaging such specific pedagogy and assessment tools by law 
schools is highly recommended to ensure that the new generation of 
AI-era lawyers can achieve the essential balance between human 
and AI roles in legal practice articulated earlier in this paper. Studies 
suggest that such a call for law schools to step in with AI and law 
orientation is beginning to receive positive responses from top-
ranked US law schools, and their specific experiences of AI-
enriched curriculum development and related pedagogical 
experiments should provide invaluable references (Johnson & Shen, 
2021). 
 
Conclusion 
 
From the analysis of the major issues relating to the use of 
AI addressed in this paper, some key findings and conclusions 
emerge. These are pertinent for providing the future directions; the 
individual jurisdictions may take in governing the engagement of AI 
in the legal profession. First, there is a theoretical question of 
whether the widespread response of US Bar Associations to the 
emerging use of AI in US legal practice could be attributed to the 
autonomous characteristic of the legal profession. However, the 
findings of this paper challenge the premise of classifying the US 
legal profession as totally autonomous. Two specific findings from 
this paper could be considered as potential grounds for challenging 
the conclusion of total professional autonomy of the legal practice 
in the US. Firstly, the findings emerging from the scholarly debates 

Evolving Norms Governing AI Engagement in Legal Practice and the 
Prospective Alignment of Law School Curriculum 
47 
surrounding the accountability and self-regulatory characteristics of 
the legal profession cast some serious doubts as to the autonomous 
character of the legal profession in the US. Studies challenging the 
myth of US legal professional autonomy, and those arguing the 
eroding nature of self-regulation and the increasing intervention by 
some state legislative bodies, represent the first set of grounds that 
could shake the belief of legal professional autonomy in the US. 
Secondly, some direct evidence of judicial intervention and 
attempts to streamline specific practices of the legal profession also 
contribute to the challenges. Trends of courts and individual judges 
issuing directions to practitioners regarding the use of AI in legal 
practice, identified and analysed in this paper, could be perceived as 
evidence of the dilution of the professional autonomy that legal 
practitioners are believed to possess in the US. Although these 
findings raise some reasonable doubts about the scope of autonomy, 
none of them are groundbreaking to deny the predominantly 
autonomous characteristic of the legal profession in the US. 
Moreover, the concerns emerging from these findings are either 
internal trepidations from within the profession or academic 
deliberations that fail to go deep enough to shake the foundations of 
professional autonomy in legal practice. As argued earlier in the 
paper, the interventions of the judiciary, like the recent judicial 
directions on the responsible use of AI, are mainly confined to the 
matters that could potentially affect the judicial function and were, 
as such, not intended to restrain or regulate the autonomy of the 
profession, especially issues that fall within the exclusive attorney-
client relationship. Moreover, it can be concluded that in 
comparison with other jurisdictions, the relatively high number of 
pioneering initiatives governing the use of generative AI from both 
the federal as well as state bars across the US would not have been 
possible without enjoying a very high degree of autonomy and will 
to self-regulate. 
The conclusion that the autonomous nature of the US legal 
profession is a major driving force behind the conception and 
development of the regulatory standards governing AI in the legal 
profession should also enhance its utility as a key reference for 
comparative studies seeking to propose first-generation regulatory 
standards in other jurisdictions out the US. The enhanced 
significance of the US standards should arise from several factors. 
The fact that these US AI regulatory standards are conceived by the 

UCP Journal of Law & Legal Education 
48 
legal professional bodies and not by the state or other extraneous 
agencies should motivate a wider acceptance of these standards 
among legal practitioners in different jurisdictions. They should be 
well convinced of the inherent ability of the US standards to 
effectively balance the interests and benefits of legal professionals 
vis a vis others. The relevance of the US AI initiatives inspiring the 
development of legal professional standards outside the US should 
be more palpable in other common law jurisdictions.  However, they 
do not need to emulate the regulatory standards of the US and can 
customise relevant standards considering the needs of their 
respective legal profession. 
The appeal of the US standards, specifically for other 
common law jurisdictions, is due to unique elements in the AI 
regulatory standards examined in this paper. As specific benefits of 
generative AI technology recognised by the US initiatives are more 
congenial to the nature of common law legal practice, the related 
standards should be more suited to the demands of common law 
practice in other jurisdictions. From the detailed examination of 
various generative AI standards in this paper, it can be concluded 
that they fundamentally adhere to the principles of technological 
neutrality and functional equivalence. Especially the rules limiting 
the professional role of AI only to the functions equivalent to those 
discharged by the lawyer and non-lawyer assistants while retaining 
the indispensable tasks of a lawyer intact are some of the key 
strengths of the US standards capable of inspiring regulatory 
transplants to other common law jurisdictions. Finally, the 
directives of the US courts on the use of AI in matters impacting the 
functions of common law courts should also inspire common law 
courts in other jurisdictions to initiate similar measures. 
As a core conclusion emerging from this paper, it is crucial 
to underscore the significance of some key elements warranting a 
clear understanding of the functioning of AI technology and the 
need to teach and develop basic AI knowledge and skills among 
existing and budding legal practitioners. The exposition of various 
types and designs of AI technologies in this paper reveals how the 
clarity about the functioning of the essential elements of AI 
technology like the basic algorithms, different types of data sets, 
neural networks, large language models, self-learning abilities and 
the related possibility of data retention will enhance the skills of 
legal practitioners to potentially identify specific vulnerabilities and 

Evolving Norms Governing AI Engagement in Legal Practice and the 
Prospective Alignment of Law School Curriculum 
49 
pitfalls in the use of AI and to take necessary precautions. However, 
it is important to point out that the measures enhancing the basic 
understanding of the technological process of AI, particularly its 
generative iterations, are essential to safeguard against risks and, 
more importantly, fully exploit its untapped potential.  
Deriving from the above inspiration, the training of the legal 
fraternity in AI should transcend beyond continuing legal education 
programs and involve law schools in nurturing current and budding 
lawyers. In this regard, the need to design new higher-degree AI-
inspired legal specialisation programs or interdisciplinary law and 
technology programs targeted at developing deep AI capabilities 
among licensed lawyers is fundamental. More significantly, the 
need to redesign law school degree programs to nurture future 
lawyers with the necessary curriculum and pedagogical alignment 
with the emerging AI professional regulatory standards is highly 
significant. All the efforts to develop AI capabilities and to 
streamline the use of AI by legal professionals and the judiciary 
should be cognisant of an important principle that no one should be 
denied the benefits of AI. This principle is fundamental to avert the 
risk of triggering any potential AI divide in human society. 
References 
 
ABA. (2019, August). Resolution No. 112. Washington DC, USA: 
Science and Technology Law Section of American Bar 
Association. 
ABA. (2022, February 14). Resolution No. 700. Adopted by House 
of Delegates at Virtual Mid-year Meeting. Washington DC, 
USA: American Bar Association. 
ABA. (2023, February). Resolution No. 604. Report to the House of 
Delegates. Washington D.C., USA: Cybersecurity Legal 
Task Force of the American Bar Association. 
Arruda, A. (2017). An Ethical Obligation to Use Artificial 
Intelligence? An Examination of the Use of Artificial 
Intelligence in Law and the Model Rules of Professional 
Responsibility. American Journal of Trial Advocacy, 40(3), 
443. 

UCP Journal of Law & Legal Education 
50 
Bartholomew v. Bartholomew, No. 92-02578 (Florida District 
Court of Appeals December 30, 1992.). 
Brennan, J. L., Stone, K. E., Kampfe, V., & Zogby, M. (2024). New 
Jersey Judiciary Releases Preliminary Guidelines For 
‘Unavoidable’ Use Of AI By Attorneys. National Law 
Review, 14(163), Para 7. 
California State Bar. (2023, November 16). Practical Guidance for 
the Use of Generative Artificial Intelligence in the Practice 
of Law. California, USA: Standing Committee on 
Professional Responsibility and Conduct, The State Bar of 
California. 
Darlene Smith v Matthew Farwell and Others, No.2282CV01197 
(Northfolk, SS. Superior Court of Commonwealth of 
Massachusetts February 12, 2024). 
Durante, M., & Floridi, L. (2022). A Legal Principles-Based 
Framework for AI Liability Regulation. In J. Mokander, & 
M. Ziosi, The 2021 Yearbook of the Digital Ethics Lab. 
Digital Ethics Lab Yearbook (p. 93). Springer. 
Ellis, M. S. (2002). Developing a Global Program for Enhancing 
Accountability: Key Ethical Tenets for the Legal Profession 
in the 21st Century. South Carolina Law Review, 54(1), 
1011. 
Florida Bar. (2024, January 19). Ethics Opinion No.24-1. Florida. 
Fortney, S. S. (2012). Law as a Profession: Examining the Role of 
Accountability. Fordham Urban Law Journal, 40, 177. 
Fuentes, G. A. (2023, May 31). Standing Order for Civil Cases 
Before A Magistrate Judge Fuentes. Chicago, Illinois, USA: 
District Court of Northern District of Illinois. 
JIC. (2023, October 13). Advisory Opinion No.2023-22. Charleston, 
West Virginia, USA: Judicial Investigation Commission. 

Evolving Norms Governing AI Engagement in Legal Practice and the 
Prospective Alignment of Law School Curriculum 
51 
Johnson, B., & Shen, F. X. (2021). Teaching Law and Artificial 
Intelligence. Minnesota Journal of Law, Science and 
Technology, 22(2), 23. 
Lola v Skadden and others, 14‐3845‐cv (United States Court of 
Appeals for the Second Circuit May 29, 2015). 
Macey, J. (2005). Occupation Code 541110: Lawyers, Self 
Regulation, and the Idea of a Profession. Fordham Law 
Review, 74, 1079. 
Margulies, P. (2005). Above Contempt?: Regulating Government 
Overreaching in Terrorism Cases. Southwestern University 
Law Review, 34, 449. 
Mata v. Avianca Inc., 22-cv-1461 (PKC) (United States District 
Court, Southern District of New York June 22, 2023). 
Medianik, K. (2017-2018). Artificially Intelligent Lawyers: 
Updating the Model Rules of Professional Conduct in 
Accordance with the New Technological Era. Cardozo Law 
Review, 39, 1497. 
Michigan State Bar. (2023, October 27). State Bar of Michigan 
Ethics Opinion JI-155. Michigan Code of Judicial Coduct-
Annotated. Michigan, USA: Michigan Judicial Institute. 
Otey, B. S. (2014). Millennials, Technology, and Professional 
Responsibility: Training a New Generation in Technological 
Professionalism. Journal of the Legal Profession, 37, 199. 
Powell, M. J. (1985). Developments in the Regulation of Lawyers: 
Competing Segments and Market, Client, and Government 
Controls. Social Forces, 64(2), 281. 
Reid, M. (2019). A Call to Arms: Why and How Lawyers and Law 
Schools Should Embrace Artificial Intelligence. University 
of Toledo Law Review, 50(3), 477. 

UCP Journal of Law & Legal Education 
52 
Rhode, D. L. (2003). In the Interests of Justice: A Comparative 
Perspective on Access to Legal Services and Accountability 
of the Legal Profession. Current Legal Problems, 56(1), 93. 
Roberts, H., Cowls, J., Hine, E., Morley, J., Wang, V., Taddeo, M., 
& Floridi, L. (2023). Governing artificial intelligence in 
China and the European Union: Comparing aims and 
promoting ethical outcomes. The Information Society, 39(2), 
79. 
Simon, M., Lindsay, A. F., Sosa, L., & Comparato, P. (2018). Lola 
v. Skadden and the Automation of the Legal Profession. The 
Yale Journal of Law and Technology, 20, 234. 
Simshaw, D. (2018). Ethical Issues in Robo-Lawyering: The Need 
for Guidance on Developing and Using Artificial 
Intelligence in the Practice of Law. Hastings Law Journal, 
70, 173. 
Stephen Thaler v. Shira Perlmutter and US Copyright Office, 22-
1564 (BAH) (United States District Court, District of 
Columbia August 18, 2023). 
UNCITRAL. (2023, July 3-21). Report of Working Group IV 
(Electronic Commerce) on the work of its sixty-fourth 
session (Vienna, ). United Nations Commission on 
International Trade Law Fifty-sixth session. Vienna: United 
Nations. 
Vaden, S. A. (2023, June 8). Order on Artificial Intelligence. New 
York, USA: United States Court of International Trade. 
Wendel, W. B. (2003). Informal Methods of Enhancing the 
Accountability Lawyers. South Carolina Law Review, 54(4), 
967. 
White, L. (2023). ABA Adopts Guidelines for Artificial Intelligence. 
Washington DC: The Federalist Society. 

Evolving Norms Governing AI Engagement in Legal Practice and the 
Prospective Alignment of Law School Curriculum 
53 
Wright, R. F., & Miller, M. L. (2010). The Worldwide 
Accountability Deficit for Prosecutors. Washington and Lee 
Law Review, 67, 1587. 
 
 
